
Analyzing and Encoding the Al-Mawrid Arabic-English
Dictionary with the ISO Language Markup Framework and TEI Lex-0
Diaa M. Fayed1            Laurent Romary2
1Faculty of Information Technology and Computer Science,
Sinai University, Arish, Egypt,
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6330-6328
diaa.fayed@su.edu.eg, diaa.fayed@outlook.com

2Inria, Director for Scientific Information and Culture,
ISO committee TC 37 (Language and terminology), president (2016-),
DARIAH EU infrastructure, president of the Board of Directors (2014-2018),
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0756-0508
laurent.romary@inria.fr

Abstract. This paper presents a robust methodology for the systematic digitization and encoding of the Al-Mawrid Arabic–
English dictionary, transforming it from a legacy print resource into a standardized computational lexicon. Addressing a
significant gap in Arabic lexical infrastructure, the study adopts a dual -standard framing that aligns the ISO Lexical Markup
Framework (LMF) with the Text Encoding Initiative TEI Lex -0 guidelines. By applying an editorial view to the dictionary's
macro- and microstructure, the research resolves the structural ambiguities and punctuation inconsistencies typical of 20th -
century bilingual dictionaries.
     The methodology is grounded in an empirical analysis of the dictionary’s lexical knowledge density. Drawing on a
representative sample (the letter Ayn, comprising 4.6% of the total volume), the study provides scientific weight to the encoding
process, demonstrating a structural parsing accuracy of 91%. Quantitative evaluation of the information extraction rules reveals
high performance, with 85% precision and 98% recall for synonyms, and 88% precision for other morpho-semantic features.
     Beyond technical description, the paper provides a critical comparison with existing Arabic lexical resources and discusses
the limitations of TEI Lex -0 when modelling specific Arabic phenomena, such as implicit "open set" semantic relations and
scattered morphological cues. Furthermore, the study explores the potential for Linguistic Linked Open Data (LLOD) integration
by establishing a scalable prefix-based referencing system that facilitates the resource's inclusion in the semantic web. The result
is an interoperable, machine-tractable resource that provides a reproducible workflow for the retro-digitization of complex legacy
bilingual lexicons within the Arabic NLP and Digital Humanities communities.

Keywords: Arabic-English, Al-Mawrid, Machine-Readable Dictionary (MRD), Language Markup Framework (LMF), TEI Lex-
0, Information Extraction, Linked Open Data.

1. Introduction
Despite a rich and long -standing lexicographical tradition, the Arabic language suffers from a significant
scarcity of lexical resources encoded according to international interoperability standards. While widely
used reference works like the Al -Mawrid Arabic -English dictionary provide va st linguistic data, they
remain largely "locked" in print -oriented or inconsistent digital formats that are inaccessible to modern
computational tools. This paper addresses this research gap by proposing a standardized meth odology to
transform the Al-Mawrid into a machine -readable resource, facilitating its integration into Natural
Language Processing (NLP) and Digital Humanities applications
To achieve this, we employ a dual -standard framework. The ISO Language Markup Framework
series (LMF, ISO 24613) provides the essential structural model for representing complex semasiological
lexical data. This is complemented by the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) guidelines and, specifically, TEI
Lex-0, a community -driven baseline that streamlines  the encoding of retro -digitized dictionaries. By
aligning these two frameworks, this study demonstrates a methodology that preserves the dictionary's
macro- and microstructural integrity while enhancing its technical interoperability.
In the transition from print to digital, we adopt the editorial view Costa et al.(2022), Ide and Véronis (1995).
Unlike the typographic view, which prioritizes visual layout, the editorial perspective treats the dictionary

as a meaningful linear stream of tokens, allowing us to focus on the systematic representation of
typographic, syntactic (dictionary structure) and semantic (identifying meaningful components in an entry)
information. This approach is particularly effectiv e for resolving the structural ambiguities and implicit
linguistic cues —such as those found in multiword expressions (MWEs) and cross -references—that are
prevalent in Al-Mawrid.
The primary contributions of this work are threefold:
1. The production of a validated TEI Lex-0/LMF encoding of the Al-Mawrid suitable for
computational use.
2. The resolution of structural inconsistencies typical of legacy print dictionaries through
standardized markup.
3. The proposal of a reusable workflow for the retro-digitization of other Arabic legacy
dictionaries, ensuring they meet FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable) data
     Principles Wilkinson et alI (2016).

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 surveys relevant literature on Arabic lexical
modelling; Section 3 provides a structural analysis of the Al-Mawrid; Section 4 details the core encoding
methodology with illustrative examples; Section 5 discusses results and evaluation; and Section 6 concludes
with future directions for Linked Open Data (LOD) integration.
2. Related Works
Research on encoding Arabic lexical resources has evolved significantly over the past two decades,
transitioning from basic digitisation to complex ontological modelling. Despite this progress, a critical gap
remains: large Arabic –English legacy bilingual dictionaries are fundamentally under -represented in
standardised digital form.
The Al-Mawrid dictionary is a critical linguistic resource because it serves as one of the most widely
used bilingual references in the Arabic-speaking world. For non-experts, its importance lies in its status as
a prominent landmark of Arabic lexicography, acting as a vast repository of lexical knowledge that bridges
the gap between Arabic and English for diverse applications.
Notably, the Al-Mawrid dictionary has never been digitised or modelled in prior research. To
identify the research gap filled by this study, in this section, we tackle the analysis of the state of the art of
Arabic digital lexicography under four complementary angles: (1) LMF-based modelling of Arabic legacy
resources; (2) the application of standards to complex Arabic phenomena; (3) the evaluation and enrichment
of standardised lexica; and (4) the emerging alignment between LMF and TEI Lex-0.
2.1 LMF-based Modelling and Retro-digitisation of Arabic Legacy Resources
The foundation for standardised Arabic lexica was established by Salmon-Alt et al. (2005), who introduced
a normalised representation to account for morphological complexity. Subsequent efforts focused on the
transformation of printed dictionaries into mac hine-readable formats using the ISO Lexical Markup
Framework (LMF). This includes Loukil et al. (2008, 2010), who developed syntactic models for Arabic
verbs, and Ammar et al. (2008), who proposed a generalised data model for MRDs. A comprehensive
normalisation pipeline was later introduced by A. Khemakhem et al . (2009 –2015), validating the
conversion of the Al-Ghani dictionary for use in modern query systems. Furthermore, Graff and Maamouri
(2012) demonstrated the utility of LMF in modernising bilingual dictionaries for colloquial Arabic dialects
to ensure cross-resource consistency.

2.2 Standardised Modelling of Complex Arabic Phenomena
To handle the inherent complexity of the Arabic language, the LMF framework has been adapted to model
specific linguistic phenomena. This includes the development of WordNets for Tunisian Arabic (Karmani
et al., 2014; Moussa & Alimi, 2015) and the compilation of lexica for Arabic particles (Namly et al., 2015).
This line of research highlights how the framework can be extended to handle non -standard varieties and
specific part-of-speech categories. Building on these foundations, recent work has explored more nuanced
Arabic lexical representations in TEI (cf. Nahli & Del Grosso, 2021) and adaptations for handling Arabic
complexity (cf. Nahli et al., 2016).
2.3 Interoperability, Evaluation, and Enrichment of Lexical Resources
A significant area of study involves how LMF encodings are operationalised and evaluated within broader
systems. Ben Abderrahmen et al. (2009) developed graphical tools to extract complex information from
LMF databases, while Wali et al. (2014) proposed sy stems to validate these dictionaries against Data
Category Registries (DCRs). Interoperability is further enhanced through the generation of ontologies from
standardised dictionaries to support Information Retrieval and Word Sense Disambiguation (Amar et a l.,
2010; Soudani et al., 2014). These studies emphasise that standardised encoding is not an end in itself but
a prerequisite for semantic enrichment and system integration.
2.4 TEI Lex-0 Retro-digitisation and LMF–TEI Alignment
The current paper’s primary value lies in its dual framing, aligning ISO -LMF structural models with TEI
Lex-0 serialisation. Prior work by Haddar et al. (2012) demonstrated the feasibility of converting syntactic
lexica into LMF and subsequently serialising them into TEI. Similarly, Elleuch et al. (2013, 2015) utilised
a rule -based approach to enrich LMF -normalised dictionaries with syntactic grammars before TEI
serialisation. Despite these advancements, there remains a lack of studies providing a TEI Lex-0 encoding
explicitly aligned with LMF for large -scale legacy bilingual dictionaries. This work fills that specific gap
by applying this dual perspective to Al-Mawrid, ensuring both structural rigour and community -standard
interoperability.
2.5 Comparative Analysis of Standardised Arabic Lexical Modelling
While the preceding sections demonstrate a robust history of Arabic lexicon modelling, a significant
research gap remains regarding the application of modern, community -driven standards to large -scale
legacy bilingual resources. Much of the existing litera ture focuses on specialized lexica —such as verb -
specific syntactic models, particle lexicons, or religious -domain ontologies —leaving general -purpose
bilingual dictionaries like the Al-Mawrid largely under-represented in standardized digital forms.
Drawing from the related works, Table 1 provides a systematic comparison between the current
study and key existing Arabic lexical resources encoded under international standards.
Table 1: Comparison of Standardised Arabic Lexical Modelling Studies.
Research Work Resource Type Standard Employed Primary Focus / Methodology
Current Study Al-Mawrid
(Arabic–English)
LMF & TEI Lex-0 Dual-standard alignment; resolution of
structural ambiguities in legacy bilingual
resources.
A. Khemakhem et al. (2015) Al-Ghani
(Monolingual)
LMF (ISO 24613) Comprehensive normalisation pipeline;
validation against DTDs and DCRs.
Graff & Maamouri (2012) Colloquial
Dialects
(Bilingual)
LMF Unified format for interoperability across
various colloquial Arabic dialects.

Haddar et al. (2012) HPSG Syntactic
Lexica
LMF & TEI Rule-based conversion and serialisation of
syntactic lexica.
Elleuch et al. (2015) Monolingual
Lexica
LMF Syntactic enrichment through corpus-based
grammars using the NOOJ platform.
Soudani et al. (2014) Hadith
Dictionaries
LMF Normalisation of unstructured religious texts
to build semantic ontologies.
Unlike previous works that focused primarily on the LMF abstract model for monolingual dictionaries (e.g.,
A. Khemakhem et al., 2015), this study addresses unique challenges in cross -linguistic alignment and
Translation Equivalence Groups (TEGs) for a general -purpose bilingual dictionary. By adopting an
editorial view, the study prioritises the faithful conversion of the dictionary’s linear stream of tokens into a
structured format that preserves original lexicographic depth while enhancing machine-readability.
3. Material and Structural Analysis
Before initiating the encoding workflow, a rigorous analysis of the source material's typographic and
structural properties is required to bridge the gap between print layout and digital schema. Al -Mawrid
employs a complex system of typographic cues —such a s bolding, indentation, colons, comma, and
semicolons—to signal semantic and syntactic relationships. This section provides the necessary
background on the dictionary's macrostructure (headword arrangement) and microstructure (the internal
logic of senses and Translation Equivalence Groups), establishing a baseline for the heuristic interpretations
used in the subsequent methodology.
3.1 Macrostructural Organisation
The macrostructure of Al-Mawrid is governed by a traditional alphabetical arrangement following the
conventions of the Arabic script. Quantitative analysis of (Baalbaki, 2004; Fayed et al., 2014) reveals that
the dictionary contains a substantial volume of lexical data, comprising appro ximately 35,000  distinct
headwords and roughly 60,000 subentries.
• Primary Reference Units: Boldface headwords function as the core nodes of lexical information.
• Semantic Grouping: Individual senses tied to a specific headword are presented as nested subentries.
• Visual Hierarchies: Typographic cues, such as left -indentation on new lines from the second sense
onward, visually differentiate meanings associated with a single lemma.
3.2 Microstructural Organisation
The microstructure typically consists of a mandatory Arabic portion and an optional English translation
section, each following a specific internal logic.

• Headword Types: While most entries feature single -word headwords, the dictionary frequently
includes "head-phrases" comprising more than one word.
• Arabic Section Fields: This portion is subdivided into three potential fields: a header (required), an
explanation, and a cross-reference (both optional).
• Translation Equivalents: The English section is organised into Translation Equivalence Groups
(TEGs). Commas separate synonymous equivalents, while semicolons define boundaries between
distinct shades of convergent meanings or subsenses.

3.3 Quantitative Distribution and Parsing Regularity
To provide the necessary scientific weight, a quantitative study (Fayed et al., 2014) was conducted on a
representative sample of the Ayn (عletter, which constitutes 4.6% of the volume. Analysis of the
microstructure's punctuation regularity reveals a structural parsing accuracy of 91%. By mapping these
scattered cues—approximately 13% of which are cross-references—into the dual-standard framework, the
methodology resolves the "hidden" hierarchies of the printed page into a fully navigable digital network.
The high degree of punctuation regularity (91%) observed in this 4.6% pilot sample indicates that the
heuristic transformation rules are highly reproducible and scalable to the remaining volume of the
dictionary with minimal adjustment.
3.4 Linguistic Markers and Punctuation Regularity
The transition from a print -oriented layout to a machine -actionable structure necessitates a rigorous
formalisation of the dictionary's visual delimiters. Under the editorial view, punctuation marks and labels
are treated as a linear stream of functional tokens that define the boundaries between lexical, semantic, and
syntactic fields. To establish the foundational logic for the subsequent automated parsing process, it is
necessary to identify the markers that signify linguistic metadata. Table 2 provides a  summary of the
primary Arabic labels and abbreviations used to classify the dictionary's lexical content

Table 2: Summary of Arabic Labels and Abbreviations.
Label / Abbreviation Meaning
]طب[ Medicine, Chemistry
(نبات)، (حيوان) Plant, Animal
ج / مفردها Plural / Singular
راجع Refer / Cross-reference
ضد / لا / غير Antonym markers
مصدر Infinitive / Maṣdar

Punctuation marks in Al-Mawrid fulfil critical structural and interpretive roles, defining the boundaries
between headers, definitions, and translations. As illustrated in the microstructural snapshot of the letter
Ayn (Figure 1), a colon (:) typically separates the header from the expor
the conjunction "أوor) are used to separate synonymous words or phrases. Within the English section,
semicolons distinguish between different Translation Equivalence Groups (TEGs), separ ating shades of
convergent meaning that are not strictly synonymous. Table 3 systematises these structural roles to guide
the heuristic transformation of the text.
.
Table 3: Punctuation Markers and Structural Roles.
Symbol Location Function
Colon (:) Arabic Introduces a definition or explanation.
)، Arabic Separates synonyms or orthographic variants.
Dash (–) Arabic Precedes a cross-reference label.
Semicolon (;) English Separates English subsenses/translation groups.
Comma (,) English Separates synonymous translation equivalents.
Parentheses ( ) Both Enclose contextual glosses or grammatical info.
Brackets [ ] Arabic Specifically enclose semantic domain labels.

The presence of high punctuation regularity —which enabled a structural parsing accuracy of 91% in
independent error source analysis—validates the adoption of this editorial perspective for digital encoding.
By mapping these scattered cues into the LMF/TEI Lex-0 framework, the methodology resolves the
"hidden" hierarchies of the printed page into a fully navigable digital network
3.5 Quantitative Distribution of Lexical Knowledge
The scientific weight of the proposed methodology depends on providing evidence-based indicators of the
resource's coverage and extraction accuracy. To provide context for the pilot scale of our encoding, we
incorporate baseline statistics from Fayed et al . (2014) regarding the overall variety of linguistic data
categories available in the source material. Utilizing a representative sample of the Ayn (عletter chapter—
representing 4.6% of the dictionary’s total volume—Table 4 quantifies the distribution of significant lexical
relations and evaluates the extraction performance of the heuristic rules. In this context, precision signifies
the accuracy of the extracted relations (the proportion of correct results among retrieved items), while recall
measures the system’s coverage (its ability to identify all relevant relations present in the source material).

Table 4: Distribution and Extraction Performance of Lexical Relations.
Relation Type Significance Signal Type Precision Recall
Synonyms Highest Implicit (Commas) 85% 98%
Domain Labels High Explicit (Brackets) 88% 73%
Derivations High Explicit (Maṣdar) 88% 73%
Hyponyms Moderate Implicit (Genus) 88% 33%*
Antonyms Low Explicit (Ḍidd) 88% 73%

*Note: The low recall for hyponyms is attributed to the fact that 77% of these relations in the source material are implicit "open
set" structures that follow a genus-differentia pattern rather than utilizing fixed keywords.

The evaluation reveals that while synonymous relations are highly regular and effectively retrieved,
hierarchical relations such as hyponymy are frequently embedded within implicit natural -language
phrasing. This underscores a major limitation of applying standard schemas to legacy Arabic dictionaries:
the near-total lack of formal tagging requires the encoder to rely on "expert induction" to infer and then
formalise these relations.
To establish a baseline for structural parsing and regularity, we draw on quantitative findings by
Fayed et al. (2014), which recorded a structural parsing accuracy of 91% when accounting for independent
error sources. This high degree of regularity validates the decision to adopt an editorial view for digital
encoding, as the primary sources of error stem from in -dictionary inconsistencies (such as missing colons
or mismatched headwords) rather than failures of the parser logic. Table 5 provides a granular  breakdown
of these error sources and their relative frequency within a representative sample.

Table 5: Independent Error Analysis of Structuring Steps.
Error Source Frequency Example Failure
In-Dictionary Highest Missing colons or inconsistent domain brackets.
Data Entry Moderate Entries dropped or shifted during digitisation.
Parser Lowest Faulted characters or unexpected whitespace.

By mapping these scattered linguistic cues - approximately 13% of which are cross-references - into the dual-
standard framework, the methodology resolves the "hidden" hierarchies of the printed page into a fully navigable
digital network. This transition ensures that the resource is prepared for immediate integration into automated Arabic
NLP pipelines and Linguistic Linked Open Data (LLOD) frameworks.

To demonstrate the practical application of these structural principles, Figure 1 presents the full entry
for the headword ʿayn (عَيْنThis entry provides a representative sample of the dictionary's microstructural
complexity, containing a mandatory Arabic section and various optional fields such as explanations, cross-
references, and Translation Equivalence Groups (TEGs).
The fundamental structural components of the Al-Mawrid subentries have been previously identified
through linear analysis (Baalbaki, 2004; Fayed et al., 2014), which defines the hierarchy of mandatory
headers and optional cross-references.
By adopting an editorial view for this analysis, we prioritise the systematic representation of typographic
and semantic cues – such as indentation and colons - to resolve the structural ambiguities inherent in legacy
print formats. This approach ensures that the "hidden" hierarchies of the printed page are transformed into
an explicit, machine-actionable dictionary.


eye عَيْن: عُضْوُ البَصَر
evil eye عَيْن، عَيْنٌ لامَّة ، عَيْنٌ مُصِيبَةٌ بِسُوء
spring, source, fountainhead, headspring, spring,
wellhead, wellspring, springhead, fountain, well
عَيْن: يَنْبُوع
spy عَيْن: جاسُوس
scout, reconnoiterer, explorer عَيْن: مُسْتَكْشِف، مُسْتَطْلِع
overseer, inspector, supervisor, superintendent  عَيْن: ناظِر، مُرَاقِب
lookout, guard, watch(man) عَيْن: حارِس
eye, threading hole عَيْن: ثُقْبُ الإبْرَة
specie, coin(s) عَيْن: عُمْلَةٌ مَعْدِنيَّة
cash, ready money  عَيْن: نَقْدٌ حاضِر
property, assets, personality, personal property,
chattel(s), goods
عَيْن: مال، أَمْوال، مِلْك
usury, interest عَيْن: رِبَا، فائِدَة
choice, pick, prime, flower, cream, top, elite عَيْن: خِبْرَة، صَفْوَة
notable, dignitary, person of distinction,
prominent person, leading personality
عَيْنٌ: وَجِيهٌ
lord, master, chief, head عَيْن: سَي ِد
substance, essence عَيْن: جَوْهَر
the same, the very, the selfsame, the identical عَيْن (كذَا)، عَيْنُهُ، بِعَيْنِهِ: نَفْسُهُ، ذاتُهُ
opal عَيْنُ الشَّمْس: أُوبَال (حَجَرٌ كَرِيم
second radical of a verb عَيْنُ الفِعْل
cat’s-eye عَيْنُ الهِر : حَجَرٌ نِصْفُ كَرِيم
in kind, in specie عَيْنًا
an eye for an eye, tit for tat العَيْنُ بِالعَيْن
with the naked (or unaided) eye بِالعَيْنِ المُجَرَّدَة
none other than, the very, the very same, the
same, the selfsame, the identical; personally, in
person
بِعَيْنِه، هُوَ عَيْنُهُ
 أَخَذَ بِعَيْنِ الاعْتِبَار  –  راجع أَخَذَ
concrete noun اسْمُ عَيْنٍ
with one's own eyes بِأُمِ  عَيْنِهِ ، بِعَيْنِهِ
to see with one’s own eyes رَأَى رأْي  العَيْن
 طَرْفَةُ عَيْن  –  راجع طَرْفَة
 على الرَّأْسِ والعَيْن  –  راجع رَأْس
individual duty فَرْضُ عَيْن
 مَجْلِسُ أَعْيان –  راجع مَجْلِس
Figure 1: The entry “عَيْنin the Al-Mawrid.


4. Encoding Methodology: The Dual LMF/TEI Lex-0 Framework
The transformation of Al-Mawrid from a print-based reference into a machine-readable resource requires a
methodology capable of resolving high levels of structural ambiguity and implicit linguistic data. To ensure
both theoretical rigor and technical interoperability, this study adopts a dual-standard approach: we utilize
the ISO Language Markup Framework (LMF, ISO 24613) for its robust conceptual modeling of lexical
structures and TEI Lex-0 for its streamlined, community -standardized XML serialization. This alignment
is critical because, while TEI provides the vocabulary for representational encoding, the LMF layer ensures
that the underlying lexical model remains compliant with international standards for data exchange and
NLP integration.
The encoding methodology for Al-Mawrid is specifically designed to resolve the structural
ambiguities inherent in its legacy print -based lexicography. Unlike modern digital -born resources, Al -
Mawrid relies heavily on typographic cues —such as indentation and punctuation —to signal semantic
boundaries, while largely lacking explicit part-of-speech (POS) tags. Consequently, our workflow is not a
mere tag-assignment exercise but a heuristic transformation governed by the editorial view
Our encoding strategy is governed by the editorial view, which treats the dictionary as a linear
stream of tokens. This perspective allows us to systematically map the dictionary’s unique features —such
as indented subentries and implicit part -of-speech (PO S) categories —into explicit, queryable XML
structures. The following subsections detail the encoding of key components, including entries, multiword
expressions (MWEs), and cross -referencing schemes. Moving beyond a purely technical description, this
methodology section focuses on the research motivations and the "why" behind each modelling decision—
specifically how the constraints of TEI Lex-0 and the requirements of LMF guided the resolution of specific
Arabic lexicographic challenges.
To support the "dual-standard" claim, the conceptual mapping between the two frameworks is made
explicit in the table below, serving as the foundational logic for the rules and illustrations that follow. Table
6 provides a foundational mapping for the subs equent methodology, clarifying how specific LMF
conceptual classes concretely shape our modelling choices within the TEI Lex -0 framework and
highlighting the research motivation behind each mapping decision.

Table 6: Mapping of Al-Mawrid Methodology to LMF and TEI Lex-0.
LMF Class (Conceptual Layer) TEI Lex-0 Element Methodological Function in Al-
Mawrid
LexicalEntry <entry> Represents the primary reference unit or
head-phrase,,.
LexicalEntry (Nested) <entry type="homonymicEntry"> Disambiguates headwords functioning
across multiple parts of speech.
RelatedEntry <entry type="relatedEntry"> Models MWEs and subentries that carry
their own semantic data.
Lemma <form type="lemma"> Encapsulates the orthographic
representation of the Arabic headword.
Form (Variant) <form type="variant"> Preserves orthographic lemma
variations found in the entry header.
Form (Inflection) <form type="inflected"> Represents plurals or specific
inflections signaled in parentheses.
Form (Derivative) <form type="derived"> Models derived forms like maṣdar
(infinitive) markers.
Sense <sense> Models individual meanings or
semicolon-delimited subsenses.
Equivalent <cit
type="translationEquivalent">
Maps Arabic source words to English
target-language equivalents.
Equivalent (Free text) <cit type="translation"> Used when the translation is a
descriptive phrase rather than a direct

equivalent.
MorphosyntacticProperties <gramGrp> Formalises implicit or inferred POS and
grammatical cues.
SubjectField <usg type="domain"> Converts square-bracketed domain
labels into queryable metadata.
Context <gloss> Captures parenthetical clarity markers
and unstructured semantic cues.
SenseRelation <xr> Functions as a structural wrapper for
the entire cross-referencing block.
(Implicit Link) <ref> Provides the machine-actionable target
URI for cross-references.
Statement (Label) <lbl> Formalises abbreviated cues for gender,
number, or cross-referencing keywords.
Example <cit type="example"> Encapsulates illustrative sentences
demonstrating lemma usage.
(Text Content) <quote> Holds the actual textual content of
illustrative examples or free
translations.
(Structural Marker) <pc> Formalises punctuation marks used as
functional delimiters between fields.

To illustrate these principles, the subsequent sections employ a minimal, representative set of
"miniature proofs" that focus on the methodological logic and research motivations behind each modelling
choice. Each example serves as a functional demonstrati on of how print inconsistencies are transformed
into structured, machine-readable data without compromising the integrity of the original resource. While
this section prioritises the "why" behind specific encoding decisions to ensure clarity, the full brea dth of
the dictionary’s patterns —including rich and repetitive examples —is provided in Appendices A through
K, organised by subsection topic.
4.1 Entry Representation and Lemma Modelling
The encoding of Al-Mawrid centers on the <entry> element, which serves as the primary structural unit for
aggregating all lexical, semantic, and syntactic information associated with a specific lemma. In the original
print edition, an entry is defined by a boldface header and ofte n spans multiple lines, using visual
indentation to distinguish subsequent senses. Our methodology translates this visual hierarchy into a
machine-readable format by adopting the editorial view, which represents these indented lines as distinct
<sense> blocks; specifically, this approach utilizes nested <sense> elements to explicitly model the
subsenses signaled by semicolons in the source material.

To satisfy the interoperability requirements of the ISO -LMF standard while adhering to the TEI
Lex-0 baseline, every <entry> is assigned a unique xml:id and a mandatory xml:lang attribute. These are
not merely technical prerequisites; they are methodological solutions to the structural ambiguities of legacy
dictionaries, ensuring that every headword and its associated senses are computationally addressable and
unique within a global NLP pipeline.
The transformation of the dictionary’s primary reference unit is best illustrated by the following
example in Figure 1 where a single -word lemma and its translation are aligned within the <entry>
framework. This mapping satisfies the structural requirement s of TEI Lex -0 while ensuring that the
headword remains computationally addressable and unique within a global NLP pipeline.

Full/Partial Entry بْض ِيّ
ُ
أpopliteal
LMF/TEI Lex-0 Encoding <entry xml:id="me-000001" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
 <form type="lemma"><orth>بْض  ِي
ُ
أّorth></form>
 <sense n="se-01">
  <cit type="translationEquivalent" xml:lang="en">
    <form><orth>popliteal</orth></form></cit></sense></entry>
Figure 2: Simplest entry: single-word lemma and single-word translation.

For a comprehensive collection of entry types, including multi-lemma headers and prepositional phrases,
refer to Appendix A: Entry Representation and Lemma Modelling.
4.1.1 Grammatical Mapping and Header Typolog
A fundamental challenge in Al-Mawrid is the near-total lack of formal part -of-speech (POS) tags, which
occur in less than 1% of entries. To resolve this, our methodology adopts a heuristic approach where the
structural category of the header dictates the application of explicit linguistic metadata via the <gramGrp>
and <gram> elements. This approach is applied across three primary header types to ensure the resource is
computationally actionable:
• Single-Word Lemmas: For simple entries, the orthographic headword is encapsulated within <form
type="lemma">. While the POS is often implicit, this structural isolation allows for the manual or
automated attachment of inferred tags —such as "Noun" or "Ver b"—inside a <gramGrp> block,
facilitating future automated indexing.
• Prepositional Collocates: When a lemma is paired with a specific preposition (e.g., ṣarraḥa bi-), we
use a <gram type="collocate"> element within a <gramGrp> container. This decision is motivated by
the need to formalise syntactic dependencies that are only implicitly suggested in print, thereby
enhancing the resource's utility for modern syntactic parsers.
• Orthographic Variants: Headers containing spelling variations (e.g., ʿajufa and ʿajifa) are modelled
as nested <form type="variant"> elements. By nesting these within a parent lemma, we ensure they
share the same inferred grammatical properties (such as plurality or derivation type) formalised in the
parent's <gramGrp>, preserving microstructural integrity while enabling precise lexical search.
4.1.2 Modelling Multiword Expression (MWE) Headers
The most significant microstructural complexity occurs when a header functions as a Multiword Expression
(MWE). For macrostructural MWEs —those that serve as primary headwords —the encoding mirrors the
single-word lemma structure but is enriched with an LMF-compliant <gram type="mwe"> element.
The inclusion of the @value attribute (e.g., value="N -N") is a strategic choice to make the LMF
layer explicit. By specifying the parts of speech of the MWE’s components, we provide the high -level
linguistic specifications required by ISO 24613 (part 2), ensuring that the digital Al-Mawrid transcends its
origins as a print reference to become a robust, standardized dataset for Arabic NLP applications.
4.2 Labels, Punctuation, and Semantic Marking
The transformation of Al-Mawrid into a machine-readable resource requires a systematic approach to the
dictionary’s vast array of labels and punctuation, which serve as the primary visual cues for structural and
interpretive boundaries. Our methodology prioritises structural disambiguation, transforming these print-
oriented indicators into explicit metadata that supports automated parsing and domain-specific filtering.


4.2.1 Domain and Linguistic Labels
To facilitate diatechnical marking—a critical requirement for domain-specific NLP applications—we map
Al-Mawrid’s field indicators (e.g., [طب] for medicine or [فلك] for astronomy) to the TEI <usg
type="domain"> element. This decision is motivated by the need to ensure that semantic fields are not
merely preserved as text but are functionally queryable within a digital lexicon.
Furthermore, the dictionary employs alphabetical indicators to convey grammatical categories (such
as ج for plural or مفردها for singular). While these are visually distinct in print, our encoding formalises them
using the <lbl> (label) element. This creates a structured link between the abbreviated label and its
underlying linguistic category, directly supporting the ISO-LMF goal of providing high-level specifications
for lexical content. The following example in Figure 3 shows the conversion of a visual m arker into
searchable metadata.
Label Translation Encoding
] Sports <pc>[</pc><usg
type="domain">رياضةusg><pc>]</pc>
Figure 3: Domain label encoding.
A complete registry of Arabic labels, abbreviations, and their functional structural roles is provided in
Appendix B: Labels, Punctuation, and Semantic Marking
4.2.2 Punctuation and Interpretive Boundaries
Punctuation in Al-Mawrid is more than a typographic feature; it defines the functional relationship between
linguistic objects. We employ the <pc> (punctuation) element to formalise these delimiters, following a
strict logic based on their interpretive roles:
• Colons (:) are encoded to signal the transition from a header to a definition or explanation,
essentially marking the boundary between the lemma and its semantic interpretation.
• Commas (,) are used to distinguish between orthographic variants or synonymous phrases, enabling
NLP tools to identify discrete lexical items within a single entry.
• Parentheses (...) present a specific modelling challenge, as they contain both structured
(syntax/semantic knowledge) and unstructured information. Following the editorial view, we encode
structured parenthetical data into standard TEI elements while preserving unstructured "clarity" cues
within <gloss> elements.
By formalising these cues, we resolve the implicit relationships found in the print edition, ensuring that the
digital resource adheres to FAIR data principles by making the dictionary’s internal logic accessible to
machine-processing tools.
4.3 Lexical Structure and Reference Modelling
Standardising the architecture of Al-Mawrid requires a formal mapping of its visual macrostructure and
microstructure into a machine -actionable hierarchy. Our methodology translates the print dictionary’s
reliance on typography and space into a recursive XML structure, ensuring that the implicit re lationships
between headwords and senses are explicitly defined for computational use. To establish connectivity, this
fragment in Figure 4 shows how structural roles are encoded within unique IDs.


Structural Component LMF/TEI Lex-0 XML Fragment
Main Entry <entry type="mainEntry" xml:id="me-000001">
Sense <sense n="se-01">
Figure 4: Macrostructure, Microstructure and Referencing system.
Detailed diagrams of the recursive XML hierarchy and the zero-padded ID registry are available in
Appendix C: Lexical Structure and Reference Modelling.
4.3.1 Macrostructure: From Print Layout to XML Hierarchy
In its original form, Al-Mawrid follows the alphabetical conventions of the Arabic script, utilizing visual
indentation to group related senses under a single boldface headword. To preserve this semantic grouping
while enabling high-granularity data retrieval, we represent each headword as a top-level <entry> element.
The motivation for our nesting strategy lies in the resolution of semicolon-delimited translations. In
the print edition, semicolons are used to separate convergent meanings that are not strictly synonymous.
Following the TEI Lex -0 baseline, we parse these  semicolon-delimited groups into distinct <sense> or
nested <sense> elements. This methodological choice transforms a flat list of equivalents into a layered
semantic model, allowing Natural Language Processing (NLP) tools to distinguish between subtle sha des
of meaning that were previously "locked" within a single typographic line.
4.3.2 Microstructure: Disambiguating Homonyms and Multiword Expressions
The microstructure of Al-Mawrid is characterized by a high frequency of "head -phrases" and lemmas
serving multiple grammatical roles. Our encoding methodology addresses these complexities through a
dual-entry classification system:
• Homonymic Disambiguation: When a headword functions under multiple grammatical categories
(e.g., as both a noun and a verb), we encode each role as a nested <entry type="homonymicEntry">.
The reason for this nesting, rather than using flat sibling entrie s, is to maintain the integrity of the
lemma while providing the fine -grained linguistic analysis required for automated disambiguation
tasks.
• MWE Integration: To distinguish between core lexical senses and fixed sequences, we categorize
subentries into direct senses (<sense>) and related entries (<entry type="relatedEntry"> for
Multiword Expressions). This layered structure is a strategic inte rvention designed to support clear
semantic organization; it ensures that idiomatic expressions are not lost within the definition text but
are instead treated as unique lexical objects with their own specific IDs.
By formalizing these structural boundaries, the methodology ensures that the digital resource does not
merely mirror the print layout but actively enhances its utility for Digital Humanities and NLP applications
by making the dictionary's internal logic fully explicit.
4.3.3 Systematic Referencing and Identification
A fundamental challenge in transitioning Al-Mawrid from a print -based reference to a machine -readable
resource is the lack of formal regularity in its original layout. To resolve these structural ambiguities and
ensure the resource is suitable for Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Digital Humanities ( DH)
applications, we have implemented a scalable referencing system based on unique identifiers (@xml:id)
and sequential values (@n).
The motivation for this systematic identification is twofold: first, to enable precise internal cross -
referencing within a complex macrostructure; and second, to facilitate external computational access to

specific lexical objects. Rather than adopting a flat numbering scheme, we employ a prefix-based taxonomy
that explicitly encodes the structural role of each component within the ID itself. This design choice ensures
that the digital architecture remains both human-interpretable and machine-parsable:
• Entry Classification: Primary headwords are distinguished by the prefix "me" (main entry), while
hierarchical complexities like homonyms and subentries are clarified via "hm" (homonymic entry)
and "re" (related entry).
• Semantic Granularity: To support fine -grained linguistic analysis, distinct identifiers are assigned
to semantic layers, with "se" designating main senses and "su" identifying the subsenses derived from
semicolon-delimited groups in the print text.
By adopting a standardised format—utilising six-digit numeric codes for entries and zero-padded two-digit
values for senses —the methodology provides a predictable and controlled environment for automated
parsing. This identification strategy follows the co mmunity best practices established by TEI Lex -0
(Burnard & Sperberg-McQueen, 2012; Tasovac et al., 2018), transforming the "hidden" hierarchies of the
printed page into a fully navigable digital network.
4.4 Multiword Expressions (MWEs)
The identification and encoding of Multiword Expressions (MWEs) represent a significant challenge in the
retro-digitisation of legacy dictionaries like Al-Mawrid. The linguistic nature of MWEs is traditionally
defined by their statistical recurrence (Smadja, 1993) and semantic opacity, where the meaning of the unit
cannot be directly derived from its individual components (Choueka, 1988; Sag et al., 2002). In print-based
lexicography, MWEs are frequently "hidden" as subentries and lack explicit labeling, su ch as "idiom" or
"collocation". This study addresses these issues by using a dual-standard approach to formalise these units
as queryable lexical objects. Following TEI Lex -0 constraints, semantic information must reside within
sense elements; thus, microstructural MWEs are uniformly represented as nested <relatedEntry> nodes to
ensure structural validity and scalability. The encoding of a macrostructural MWE using explicit
morphosyntactic declaration is shown below in Figure 5.
Full/Partial Entry صَرَّارُ اللَّيْلجُدْجُد   cricket
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-030303" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar"> <br>
<form type="lemma"><orth>ليْ اللَّ  ارُ رَّ صَ orth></form> <br> <gramGrp><gram
type="mwe" value="N-N" /></gramGrp> <br> <sense n="se-
01"><pc>:</pc><def>دجُ دْ جُ def></sense></entry>
Figure 5: A Multiword Expression (MWE) headword.
For further variations, including transparent collocations and non -transparent idiomatic gemstone names,
refer to Appendix D: Multiword Expressions.
4.4.1 Typology and Identification in Al-Mawrid
To resolve the structural inconsistencies of the source material, we categorise MWEs based on their
placement (macrostructural vs. microstructural) and semantic transparency.
• Macrostructural MWEs: These function as primary headwords.
• Microstructural MWEs: These are embedded within other entries and are further distinguished by
their transparency. Transparent MWEs (e.g., ʿayn al-fiʿl) are compositionally clear and lack formal

definitions in the text. Conversely, Non -Transparent MWEs (e.g., ʿayn al-shams meaning "opal") are
flagged by idiomatic definitions introduced by a colon (:) or by explicit cross-references (rājiʿ).
4.4.2 Encoding Strategy: Motivations for Standard Alignment
In the digital encoding process, our methodology prioritises consistency and ISO-LMF interoperability over
a mere reproduction of the print layout.
Macrostructural MWEs are encoded as <entry type="mainEntry">. To make the LMF layer explicit,
we include a <gramGrp> containing a <gram type="mwe"> element with a @value attribute (e.g., "N -N"
for Noun-Noun compounds). This provides the high-level syntactic specifications required by ISO 24613.
Microstructural MWEs are uniformly represented as nested <entry type="relatedEntry"> elements. The
methodological motivation for this choice is governed by two factors:
1. TEI Lex -0 Constraints: Community guidelines require that semantic information (translations or
definitions) reside within <sense> elements rather than <form> blocks. Because many Al-Mawrid
MWEs contain their own translations, nesting them as entries ensures structural validity.
2. Scalability: Treating all MWEs as nested entries ensures a predictable, schema -compliant
representation that supports automated extraction for NLP pipelines.
4.5 Cross-Referencing: Resolving Implicit Links
Cross-referencing in Al-Mawrid serves as a critical mechanism for reducing lexicographic redundancy,
particularly when related words share a common root or form part of complex idiomatic compounds. In the
original print format, these links are signaled by implicit cues, such as the Ara bic keyword rājiʿ (راجعor
phrases like "refer to it in its place". The goal of our methodology is to transform these static, human -
oriented indicators into machine-actionable URI targets using the TEI Lex-0 <ref> and <xr> elements. This
formalisation is essential for differentiating general links from precise semantic equivalence in NLP
applications. Figure 6 illustrates an example of resolving implicit pointers to multiple external senses.
Full/Partial Entry أَخَذَ (أَلْقَى، وَقَعَ) على عاتِقه –  راجعها في أماكنها ...
LMF/TEI Lex-0  <xr type="synonym"><pc>ـpc><lbl>أماكنها في  راجعهاlbl>
<ref type="sense" target="#me-001625.se-22">ذخَ أَ َref>
<pc>،pc>
<ref type="sense" target="#me-006840.se-19">ىقَ لْ أَ ref>
<pc>،pc>
<ref type="sense" target="#me-057995.se-17">عقَ وَ َref></xr>
Figure 6:  Cross-Reference phrase resolving multiple targets.
Additional examples illustrating complete versus partial scoping and cross-references to idiomatic phrases
are located in Appendix E: Cross-Referencing.
4.5.1 Methodological Motivations for Encoding Strategies
To ensure structural rigour and interoperability, our encoding choices are governed by the specific
constraints of the ISO-LMF and TEI Lex-0 frameworks:
• Structural Grouping: We utilize the <xr> (cross -reference) element as a functional wrapper for the
entire referencing block. This choice is motivated by the need to group the typographic markers (such
as the dash) with the functional labels and targets, maintaining the interpretive context of the original
dictionary while ensuring the block is computationally distinct.

• Semantic Alignment: The relationship between the referring and referred entries is explicitly
categorized using the @type="synonym" attribute within the <xr> element. This formalisation is
essential for NLP applications, as it differentiates between a ge neral "see also" link and a precise
semantic equivalence.
• Target Disambiguation: A major challenge in Al-Mawrid is the existence of references that lack an
explicit target word, such as "refer to them in their places". In these cases, our methodology requires
an editorial intervention where the encoder manually identifies and assigns the appropriate @target
URI. This process is vital for converting the dictionary into a functional network suitable for Linked
Data frameworks.
4.5.2 Complete vs. Partial Scoping
A key distinction in our methodology is the treatment of the reference's scope. When a synonymy spans all
senses of a lemma, the reference is encoded as complete, pointing to the top -level entry identifier.
Conversely, when the synonymy is restricted to a specific meaning, the reference is partial (scoped),
utilizing a target ID that points specifically to the relevant <sense> element. This layered approach ensures
that the digital resource reflects the precise semantic alignment intended by the lexicograph er. For a
representative example of a cross-reference resolving multiple senses, see Figure 6. Further illustrations of
MWE-related and complete references are available in the Appendix E.
4.6 Parenthesis Information: Resolving Structural Ambiguity
The encoding of parenthetical information in Al-Mawrid represents a critical methodological challenge, as
these markers often collapse distinct types of information —ranging from grammatical metadata to
unstructured semantic "clarity" cues —into a single typographic form. To address this, our methodology
adopts the editorial view, treating parentheses as functional delimiters that must be disambiguated to ensure
machine-readability and interoperability. Adopting the editorial view, we use the <gloss> element to
preserve unstructured context that the author suggests is optional. This ensures descriptive annotations
remain available for future automated extraction while maintaining a clean core lexical structure. The
preservation of unstructured parenthetical context is demonstrated below in Figure 7.

Full/Partial Entry عُوَيْلِم  (في تَصْنيفِ الأَحْياء )
LMF/TEI Lex-0 Encoding <entry xml:id="me-001001" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
 <form type="lemma"><orth>ملِ يْ وَ عُ
  gloss>(ياءالأحْ  في نيفِ صْ تَ )gloss></orth></form></entry>
Figure 7: Unstructured parenthetical information.
A systematic presentation of structured versus unstructured parenthetical data types are provided in
Appendix F: Parenthesis Information.
4.6.1 Typographic Classification and Logic
We distinguish between two types of parentheses used in the source material: square brackets [...] and
braces (...). This distinction is central to our encoding strategy:
• Square Brackets [...]: These are functionally consistent in Al-Mawrid, exclusively containing domain
or semantic field labels. These are mapped directly to the TEI element <usg type="domain">, transforming
a visual cue into a queryable metadata tag.

• Braces (...): These are structurally ambiguous, containing a mix of structured (syntactic and semantic
knowledge) and unstructured (contextual or illustrative) information.
4.6.2 Three-Tiered Encoding Strategy
To transform these braces into a standardised LMF/TEI Lex -0 format, we employ a three -tiered strategy
governed by the degree of formal regularity in the text:
1. Transformation of Structured Metadata: When braces contain explicit linguistic cues (such as gender
or part -of-speech indicators), the information is extracted and formalised using specific TEI Lex -0
elements like <gramGrp> or <lbl>. This decision is mo tivated by the ISO -LMF objective of making
implicit linguistic knowledge explicit for NLP pipelines.
2. Transformation of Semi -Structured Information: Some parenthetical info —such as brief definitions
or synonyms—is transformed into related entries or subsenses, ensuring that semantic relationships are
not "hidden" within the text.
3. Preservation of Unstructured Content: Remaining unstructured text, which the original author noted
as optional for "clarity," is preserved within the <gloss> element. This preserves the original
lexicographic context for human readers while signalling t o machine -parsers that the content is a
descriptive annotation rather than a formal attribute.
4.6.3 Narrative Example: Disambiguating Context
The necessity of this editorial intervention is evidenced in entries like ʿamīd (Figure 27), where
parenthetical info such as (ḥizb, jamāʿa, etc.)  provides the semantic scope for the definition "chief." By
encoding these as <gloss> elements within the <def> block, we maintain the hierarchical integrity of the
sense while allowing future NLP tools to extract specific semantic domains.
4.7 Synonymy: Modelling Semantic Equivalence
The treatment of synonymy in the digital Al-Mawrid is grounded in the semantic theory of Cruse (1986),
which defines synonyms as lexical items that share a central semantic core and can be substituted in context
without altering a sentence's truth value. In a legacy bilingual resource, synonymy is not merely a linguistic
relationship but a structural challenge; synonyms appear in multiple forms, ranging from explicit authorial
markers to implied definitions embedded within explanatory text.
Guided by Cruse (1986), we treat synonymy as a structural challenge requiring transformation into
a standardised semantic layer. To satisfy LMF requirements for high -level semantic specifications, each
distinct synonymous defining term is nested within a < gloss> element inside the definition. This allows
machine-parsers to identify each gloss as a discrete lexical unit for cross -linguistic mapping. Figure 8
provides a representative example of synonymous terms isolated within the definition block.
Full/Partial Entry عَجِيبَة أُعْجُوبَة، مُعْجِزَة
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<sense n="se-1"><pc>: </pc>
<def><gloss>ةوبَ جُ عْ أُ gloss><pc>،pc>
 <gloss>ةزَ جِ عْ مُ gloss></def></sense>
Figure 8: (Partial) Definitional Synonyms.
Methodological proofs for header -level synonyms and explicitly marked equivalence are detailed in
Appendix G: Synonymy.

4.7.1 Methodological Motivations for Encoding
Our methodology seeks to transform these varied print manifestations into a standardised semantic layer
that supports both human readability and automated NLP tasks. The choice of specific TEI Lex-0 elements
is motivated by the need to distinguish between pure definitions and lexical equivalents:
• Definitional Synonyms: When synonyms function as defining terms within an explanation, they are
encoded within the <def> element. However, to satisfy the LMF requirement for high -level semantic
specifications, each distinct synonymous term is nested within a <gloss> element. This structural choice is
motivated by the need to facilitate sense-alignment; by isolating the synonym from the surrounding prose,
we enable machine -parsers to identify the gloss as a discrete lexical unit suitable for cross -linguistic
mapping.
• Header -Level Synonyms: In instances where synonymous lemmas appear together in a subentry
header, our methodology employs <form type="variant" subtype="synonym">. This allows us to
distinguish between simple orthographic variations and true semantic alte rnatives, preserving the lexical
view of the entry while providing the metadata necessary for refined dictionary searches.
• Explicit Cross-Referencing: For synonyms marked by the authorial keyword rājiʿ (راجعwe utilize
the <xr type="synonym"> attribute. The motivation here is to transition the dictionary from a static print
resource into a functional sense-axis model in line with ISO 24613 (LMF). This enables the digital resource
to support complex querying where a single search can retrieve a network of semantically related terms.
By formalising these implicit and explicit cues, the methodology ensures that the digital Al-Mawrid
maintains its original lexicographic depth while becoming a harmonised, queryable resource that resolves
the inconsistencies of the print medium.
4.8 Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge Modelling
This section explores the morpho -syntactic depth of Al -Mawrid, resolving scattered cues into an explicit
model. Motivation: Explicit morphological markers (e.g., ج for plural) are mapped to standardised attributes
in <gramGrp> to ensure FAIR compliance. This transition is essential for making the dictionary's internal
logic computationally accessible without heuristic interpretation by the end -user. The Arabic components
of the entries are exceptionally rich in implicit cues; a quantitative study by Fayed e t al. (2014) highlights
this lexicographic depth, offering a baseline for our mark-up of overt and inferred information
The following illustration demonstrates the methodological formalisation of a plural inflection into
a structured computational model, a process necessitated by the need to transform scattered morphological
cues into explicitly queryable data categories. By mapping these implicit linguistic markers to standardised
XML tags, the methodology ensures that the dictionary's internal logic remains accessible to automated
NLP pipelines without requiring heuristic interpretation by the end -user. This transition pro vides the
morphological depth required to resolve the implicit relationships of the Arabic root -based system into a
machine-actionable format.
Full/Partial Entry عَجِيبَة  (ج عَجَائِب)
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<form type="lemma"><orth>ةيبَ جِ عَ orth></form><form
type="inflected">
<pc>(</pc><lbl>جlbl><orth>بائِ جَ عَ orth><pc>)</pc><gramGrp><gram
type="number" value="plural" /></gramGrp></form>
Appendix H: Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge Modelling contains comprehensive examples covering
maṣdar markers and explicit POS tags.


4.8.1 Disambiguating Explicit and Implicit Cues
Our methodology treats these cues as foundational data for Arabic NLP applications. The decision to
formalise these cues is motivated by the need to resolve the structural inconsistencies typical of legacy print
dictionaries, which often hide critical linguistic data within the phrasing of an entry.
• Explicit Cues: These are mapped directly to standardized attributes. For instance, grammatical labels
(e.g., ج for plural) are encoded within the <gramGrp> element using the <gram> sub-element. This choice
is driven by the ISO -LMF requirement for low -level specifications, ensuring that every overt linguistic
marker becomes a queryable data category.
• Implicit Cues: The Arabic components of Al-Mawrid are exceptionally rich in inferred data, as
highlighted by Fayed et al. (2014). Our encoding strategy involves an editorial intervention to transform
these contextual patterns into explicit XML tags. This process is not merely a technical task but a
methodological necessity to ensure that the dictionary's internal logic is accessible to computational tools
without requiring heuristic interpretation by the end-user.
4.8.2 Standardisation and Research Motivation
To support the study's dual -standard contribution, we align these features with both TEI Lex -0 and LMF.
While TEI provides the vocabulary for the serialization (e.g., <usg> for domain labels), the LMF layer
provides the conceptual framework for representing the underlying lexical objects. This alignment ensures
that the resulting resource is not only structured but also interoperable with modern digital humanities
infrastructures.
By systematising these syntactic and semantic markers, we move away from the "typographic view"
of the printed page and toward a "lexical view" that prioritises semantic content. This transition is essential
for making the dictionary a FAIR-compliant resource that serves as a robust model for other Arabic legacy
dictionaries. Refer to Table 11 and Table 12 in Appendix G and Appendix H  for the categorisation of these
features, and Figures 40–55 for the practical application of markup for both overt and inferred information.
4.9 Homonym Modelling: Resolving Grammatical Ambiguity
A significant challenge in retro -digitising Al-Mawrid is the treatment of headwords that function across
multiple grammatical categories without clear visual separation in the print edition. To resolve this, our
methodology adopts a hierarchical nesting strategy for homonyms, transforming a single typographic entry
into multiple, computationally distinct lexical objects.
Retro-digitising headwords that serve multiple grammatical roles requires a hierarchical nesting
strategy. By marking these roles as type="homonymicEntry", we prioritise fine-grained linguistic analysis.
This structure ensures each role is assigned a unique identity, allowing NLP pipelines to isolate and query
specific grammatical behaviours independently. The treatment of headwords with dual noun/adjective
functions is illustrated in Figure 9.
Full/Partial Entry أَثِر : أَنَانِيّ (اسم / صفة)
LMF/TEI Lex-0  <entry xml:id="me-000777" ...><form
type="lemma"><orth>رثِ أَ orth></form>
  <entry xml:id="ho-01" type="homonymicEntry"><sense
n="se-01"><def>يانِ نَ أَ ّdef><gramGrp><gram type="POS"
value="N"/></gramGrp></sense></entry> ... </entry>
Figure 9: Homonymic nesting for fine-grained analysis.

The full XML serialisation of complex homonymic entries is illustrated in Appendix I: Homonym
Modelling

4.9.1 Methodological Motivation for Nested Entries
The decision to use nested <entry> elements, rather than a flat list of parts -of-speech (POS), is motivated
by the need for microstructural precision. By marking these nested components with the
@type="homonymicEntry" attribute, we ensure that each grammatical role—such as a lemma functioning
as both a noun and an adjective—is assigned its own unique identity within the machine-readable file.
This approach is a strategic intervention that prioritises fine-grained linguistic analysis:
• Syntactic Clarity: Each nested entry includes an explicit <gramGrp> element, transforming the
dictionary's often implicit POS cues into formal metadata.
• Computational Disambiguation: This structure allows NLP pipelines to isolate and query specific
grammatical roles independently, ensuring the digital resource complies with the TEI Lex -0 baseline for
interoperability.
4.9.2 Representative Application
The necessity of this structure is clearly evidenced in the entry for ʾaṯir (أَثِرIn the print edition, this lemma
is listed once but serves two distinct functions. Our methodology treats these as two distinct entries (ho-01
for the noun and ho-02 for the adjective) nested within the primary lemma container. This ensures that the
semantic definitions for each role remain logically separated and tied to their respective syntactic markers.
(See Figure 46 in Appendix H for the complete XML representation of homonymic nesting for "أَثِر)."
4.10 Illustrative Examples and Contextual Cues
In legacy lexicography, illustrative examples and context words are essential for disambiguating the
semantic boundaries of headwords, compounds, and idioms. Within the Al-Mawrid, these elements provide
the syntactic and pragmatic framework necessary to understand typical usage in both the source and target
languages. Our methodology prioritises the functional separation of these components to ensure that usage
guides are computat ionally distinct from core definitions, thereby enhancing the resource's utili ty for
Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks.
Usage guides are essential for disambiguating semantic boundaries. Motivation: We employ the
<cit type="example"> element to ensure that syntactic context markers (subjects/objects) are addressable
via different XML paths than core definitions. This functional separation facilitates more precise automated
analysis of the dictionary's semantic structure . Figure 10  encodes a verb usage phrase involving subject -
object cues.
Full/Partial Entry هَمَّمَ (ـتِ الأُمُّ الط ِفْل َ)
LMF/TEI Lex-0  <entry xml:id="me-056491" type="mainEntry"
xml:lang="ar"><form
type="lemma"><orth>ممَّ هَ َorth></form><cit
type="example"><quote><pc>(</pc> مالأُ  ـتِ
لفْ الطِّ َpc>)</pc>ممَّ هَ َquote></cit></entry>
Figure 10: Functional separation of Illustrative Usage.
For further examples distinguishing usage sentences from context markers, see Appendix J: Illustrative
Examples and Contextual Cues.


4.10.1 Modelling Illustrative Usage
Illustrative examples frequently appear as complete sentences or phrases designed to demonstrate a lemma's
typical application. To preserve these usage guides without conflating them with the definition itself, we
employ the TEI Lex-0 <cit type="example"> element. By encapsulating the example text within a <quote>
block, we transform a visual cue into a structured citation that reflects the editorial view of the dictionary
as a stream of tokens.
For instance, the entry for hammama (to lullaby) includes the phrase (ـتِ الأُمُّ الط ِفْلَ)which provides
the necessary syntactic subjects and objects for the verb. Encoding this as a structured citation ensures that
the syntactic context is preserved in a machine-readable format while remaining distinct from the translation
equivalent.
4.10.2 Contextual Annotation and Glossing
Distinct from illustrative sentences are context words, which often appear in parentheses to signal the
specific circumstances under which a headword is used. These cues typically provide modifiers for nouns
or subjects for verbs but do not constitute a full usage example.
The motivation for our encoding strategy is to distinguish these "clarity markers" from formal
semantic attributes. We map these markers to the <gloss> element. A representative example is found in
the entry wāfaqa (to coincide), where the parenthetical phrase (في تارِيخٍ مُعَيَّن on a certain date") acts as a
context marker rather than a full illustrative sentence.
By formalising this distinction, the methodology ensures that contextual cues and illustrative
content are addressable via different XML paths, facilitating more precise automated analysis of the
dictionary's internal semantic structure.
4.11 Translation Equivalence and Semantic Granularity
The encoding of English translation equivalents is a primary step in transforming Al-Mawrid from a static
reference into a machine -actionable bilingual resource. Our methodology prioritises cross -linguistic
alignment and the resolution of convergent meanings by mapping the dictionary’s typographic markers
(commas and semicolons) to hierarchical XML structures. The final step in creating a machine-actionable
resource is the mapping of target -language data. Our methodology prioritises the segmentation of
semicolon-delimited translation clusters into nested <sense> elements that function as distinct subsenses.
Each resulting node is assigned a unique and stable identifier. This transformation of a flat list into a layered
semantic model supports the fine-grained disambiguation required for modern NLP tasks. Figure 11 layers
sense hierarchy for shades of convergent meaning.

Full/Partial Entry إِثْمsin, wrongdoing; offense, fault, misdeed; iniquity; guilt
LMF/TEI Lex-0  <sense n="se=01">
<sense n="su-01">
<cit type="translationEquivalent" xml:lang="en">
<form><orth>sin</orth></form></cit><pc>,</pc>
<cit type="translationEquivalent" xml:lang="en">
</cit><pc>,</pc><form><orth>wrongdoing</orth></form>
</cit></sense><pc>;</pc>
<sense n="su-02">
<cit type="translationEquivalent" xml:lang="en">
<form><orth>offense</orth></form></cit><pc>,</pc>
<cit type="translationEquivalent" xml:lang="en">
</cit><pc>,</pc><form><orth>fault</orth></form>
</cit><cit type="translationEquivalent" xml:lang="en">

</cit><pc>,</pc><form><orth>misdeed</orth></form>
</cit></sense><pc>;</pc>
<sense n="su-03"><cit type="translationEquivalent" xml:lang="en">
<form><orth>iniquity</orth></form></cit><pc>,</pc></sense>
<pc>;</pc><sense n="su-04">
<cit type="translationEquivalent" xml:lang="en">
<form><orth>guilt</orth></form></cit><pc>,</pc></sense>
</sense>
</entry>
Figure 11: Hierarchical Translation Equivalence.
Additional tiered translation models and free-text equivalents are available in Appendix K: Translation
Equivalence and Semantic Granularity.
4.11.1 Structural Modelling of Equivalents
To maintain interoperability within the TEI Lex -0 framework, we employ the <cit> (cited quotation)
element as the formal container for all target -language data. This decision is motivated by the need to
distinguish between different types of translation data:
• Formal Equivalents: Direct translation equivalents are marked with @type="translationEquivalent".
Within these blocks, the <form> and <orth> elements provide a structured orthographic representation,
ensuring the data is suitable for multilingual digital lexicons.
• Free -Text Translations: In instances where the translation is descriptive rather than a direct
equivalent, the methodology substitutes <form> with the <quote> element (using @type="translation").
This intervention preserves the editorial view of the text while signalling to machine-parsers that the content
is a semantic explanation rather than a lexical headword.
4.11.2 Resolving Ambiguity through Subsenses
A critical challenge in Al-Mawrid is the use of punctuation to signal semantic shades. In the print edition,
comma-separated words indicate synonymous equivalents, while semicolons separate terms with
"convergent meanings" or slightly different connotations.
To resolve this structural ambiguity, our methodology implements a layered sense hierarchy:
• Comma-delimited groups are treated as synonymous and stored within a single sense.
• Semicolon-delimited groups are parsed into distinct subsenses that are encoded by nested <sense>
elements; each identified by a unique @n attribute.
This systematic use of the @n attribute—further detailed in our referencing framework—ensures that every
shade of meaning is assigned a stable identifier. By formalising these visual boundaries, the methodology
transforms a flat list of words into a structured semantic model that supports fine-grained linguistic analysis
and NLP disambiguation tasks. (For a visual representation of this tiered translation encoding, see Figure
11).
5. Results and Discussion
This section evaluates the outcomes of the encoding process, focusing on the scientific weight and practical
utility of the resulting resource. Rather than merely recapping the encoding steps, we provide a critical
reflection on the limitations of TEI Lex -0 when applied to Arabic morphology and derivation, as well as
the manual effort required for heuristic interpretation. We present evidence -based indicators of success—
including structural coverage and navigational systematicity —and discuss the resource’s potential for
Linked Data export and integration into automated NLP pipelines.

This study successfully transformed the complex, implicit structures of Al-Mawrid into a machine-
readable format that harmonises the ISO -LMF lexical view with TEI Lex -0 serialisation. Unlike a mere
technical summary, this evaluation differentiates between the technical outcomes and the methodological
challenges of applying Western-centric standards to the highly derivational nature of Arabic lexicography.
5.1 Quantitative Evaluation and Resource Coverage
To address the need for evidence -based indicators within the constraints of commercial licensing, we
incorporate baseline statistics from Fayed et al. (2014) regarding the dictionary's overall coverage and
linguistic variety. The methodology successfully c aptured the full hierarchy of the dictionary’s
macrostructure (~35,000 headwords) and microstructure (~60,000 subentries). Empirical analysis of a
representative sample (the letter Ayn, comprising 4.6% of the volume) provides the following evidence -
based indicators of the encoding’s success:
• Structural Parsing Accuracy: Analysis of the microstructure's punctuation regularity reveals a structural
parsing accuracy of 91%. The remaining 9% error rate was primarily due to "in -dictionary"
inconsistencies, such as missing colons or mismatched headwords in the original print edition.
• Extraction Performance: Evaluation of the information extraction rules demonstrates high performance
for semantic relations. Synonyms achieved a precision of 85% and a recall of 98%, validating the
"Editorial View" approach to punctuation-driven parsing.
• Navigational Systematicity: The implementation of a prefix-based referencing scheme (e.g., me-, se-,
su-) resolved the visual ambiguities of the print edition, transforming it into a predictable digital network
where every lexical node is uniquely addressable.
5.2 Critical Reflection: Limitations and Framework Deviations
Applying TEI Lex -0 to a legacy Arabic resource revealed several representational "friction points" and
necessitated specific methodological interventions:
• Implicit "Open Set" Relations: A significant portion of Arabic lexical knowledge is implicit; for
example, 77% of hyponym/hypernym (HYP) relations in Al-Mawrid are "open set," embedded in natural
language phrasing (genus-differentia) rather than explicit keywords as recorded by Fayed et al. (2014).
TEI Lex -0 lacks internal mechanisms to automatically handle these, requiring expert "heuristic
induction" to encode them as <xr type="hypernymy">.
• Morpho-Syntactic Gaps: Al-Mawrid lacks formal part-of-speech (POS) tags in over 99% of entries. To
bridge this gap, we used LMF high -level specifications to guide the interpretation of scattered
morphological cues (e.g., maṣdar) into explicit <gramGrp> blocks.
• MWE Metadata Constraints: Under TEI Lex-0, semantic data must reside within a <sense> element to
maintain structural validity. Consequently, even compositionally transparent Multiword Expressions
(MWEs) were encoded as nested <relatedEntry> nodes to ensu re their translations were schema -
compliant.
5.3 Manual Effort and Scalability
While rule -based segmentation handled the primary headword -sense divisions, human expertise was
required for disambiguating non -transparent MWEs and unstructured parenthetical information. For
instance, determining if a bracketed phrase was a domain label (<usg>) or a contextual gloss (<gloss>)
required linguistic expertise that currently exceeds basic rule -based extraction. However, the current
methodology creates a "Gold Standard" dataset that can be used to train future automated classifiers,
significantly enhancing the scalability of the workflow for other Arabic legacy dictionaries.

5.4 Outlook: NLP Integration and Linked Data
The systematic assignment of unique @xml:id attributes facilitates the conversion of the dictionary into
dereferenceable URIs for the Linguistic Linked Open Data (LLOD) cloud. By aligning the XML structures
with the OntoLex-Lemon model, Al-Mawrid can be interlinked with other resources like Arabic WordNet
or global classification systems like DBpedia. Furthermore, by resolving semicolon -delimited sense
ambiguities into distinct nested <sense> nodes, the resource is now prepared for immediate integration into
automated NLP pipelines, such as HPSG grammar systems or semantic disambiguation tools.
6. Conclusion and Outlook
The final section synthesises the paper’s findings into three distinct areas of contribution: resource,
methodological, and conceptual. We summarise how the digital Al-Mawrid serves as a novel resource for
the Arabic-speaking world and how our dual -standard workflow offers a reusable model for other legacy
dictionaries. Finally, we provide an outlook on future work, including the planned automation of extraction
tools and the open-access publication of the resource to enhance the standardisation and interoperability of
Arabic lexicography in the digital age.
This study has successfully transformed the Al-Mawrid Arabic-English dictionary from a static print
resource into a standardised, machine -readable digital infrastructure. By implementing a dual -standard
framework—aligning ISO-LMF with TEI Lex -0—we have demonstrated that the structural complexities
of legacy Arabic lexicography can be resolved without compromising representational integrity.
6.1 Resource Contribution: The Digital Al-Mawrid
The primary output of this work is the first standardised digital encoding of Al-Mawrid, a widely used
bilingual reference previously under-represented in the digital sphere.
• Pilot Scope and Coverage: The methodology was validated across the dictionary's complete
macro- and microstructure, capturing diverse entries ranging from single -word lemmas to complex
Multiword Expressions (MWEs).
• Navigational Indicators: Novelty is evidenced by our systematic referencing scheme, which
assigned unique, persistent identifiers (e.g., me -000000 through me -999999) to every lexical node,
transforming the dictionary into a predictable, queryable network suitable for NLP pipelines.
6.2 Methodological Contribution: A Reusable Workflow
We provide a reusable encoding workflow that addresses the specific challenges of retro-digitising Arabic
legacy resources.
• Ambiguity Resolution: Our methodology successfully parsed implicit print structures, such as
semicolon-delimited translation groups, into explicit XML <sense> and nested <sense> elements (se -01,
su-01), thereby enhancing data granularity.
• Dual -Standard Mapping: A significant contribution is the explicit alignment between LMF's
abstract lexical model and TEI Lex-0’s serialisation, providing a blueprint for maintaining interoperability
across different standardisation paradigms.
•  Ultimately, this study provides a validated architectural blueprint for the digital preservation of
the broader Arabic lexicographical tradition, ensuring that legacy print heritage is transformed into
interoperable components of the global Linguistic Linked Open Data (LLOD) cloud.

6.3 Conceptual Contribution: Shifting Perspectives
The conceptual novelty of this research lies in its shift from a "typographic view" (preserving the print
layout) to a "lexical view" (extracting underlying linguistic data).
• Standardisation of Arabic Complexity: By categorising MWEs into a typology based on semantic
transparency (Transparent vs. Non -Transparent) and encoding them as distinct <relatedEntry> nodes, we
have provided a linguistically grounded solution for representing idiomatic Arabic within Western-centric
encoding standards.
• FAIR Principles: This study advances the FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable)
publication of Arabic resources, bridging the gap between traditional lexicographic traditions and the
requirements of the global Linguistic Linked Open Data (LLOD) community.
6.4 Future Directions
Building upon this foundation, future work will focus on the automation of heuristic decisions and the full-
scale LOD export of the resource to link Al-Mawrid with broader Arabic ontological networks. Specifically,
we intend to address the following areas to enhance the scalability and impact of the digital resource:
• Advanced Automation and Extraction: While the current methodology relies on manual heuristic
interpretation to resolve structural inconsistencies, this phase serves as a necessary "Gold Standard" for
training future tools. Future iterations will focus on  training machine learning classifiers to automate the
extraction and validation of parenthetical information and domain labels. These tools will specifically target
the formalisation of "open set" implicit relations, such as the 77% of hyponymic links that currently exceed
rule-based extraction capabilities.
• Semantic Web and LLOD Integration: To explore the potential of linked data technologies in depth,
the next logical step is the serialisation of these XML structures into RDF using the OntoLex-Lemon model.
The systematic prefix-based referencing scheme (e.g., me- for entries, se- for senses) provides the necessary
scaffolding for dereferenceable URIs. This will enable the resource to participate in the global Linguistic
Linked Open Data (LLOD) cloud, interlinking with resources such as Arabic WordNet and g lobal
classification systems like DBpedia or Wikidata.
• Infrastructure and FAIR Accessibility: In alignment with FAIR principles, we plan to release the
encoded dictionary under an Open Access licence. This ensures the Arabic NLP community has access to
a standardised, machine -actionable bilingual resource su itable for immediate integration into automated
pipelines, such as HPSG grammar systems or semantic disambiguation tools.
• Expansion to Legacy Lexicography: The techniques developed here provide a reusable workflow that
can be extended to other large -scale legacy Arabic dictionaries. By applying this "Editorial View" to the
broader tradition of Arabic lexicography, we aim to  transform static print heritage into a robust,
interoperable digital infrastructure for modern linguistics
References
Al-Ayyoub, M., A. Nuseir, K. Alsmearat, Y. Jararweh and B. Gupta (2018). "Deep learning for Arabic
NLP: A survey." Journal of computational science 26: 522-531.

Alghamdi, A. A. O. (2018). A Computational Lexicon and Representational Model for Arabic Multiword
Expressions, University of Leeds.

Alsharhan, E., A. Ramsay and Evaluation (2020). "Investigating the effects of gender, dialect, and training
size on the performance of Arabic speech recognition." Language Resources and Evaluation  54(4): 975-
998.


Amar, F. B. B., B. Gargouri and A. B. Hamadou (2010). Towards Generation of Domain Ontology from
LMF Standardized Dictionaries. SEKE: 515-520.

Amar, F. B. B., A. Khemakhem, B. Gargouri, K. Haddar and A. B. Hamadou (2008). LMF Standardized
Model for the Editorial Electronic Dictionaries of Arabic. NLPCS.

Attia, M., L. Tounsi and J. van Genabith (2010). Automatic Lexical Resource Acquisition for Constructing
an LMF-Compatible Lexicon of Modern Standard Arabic. The NCLT Seminar Series . Dublin, Ireland,
DCU.

Baalbaki, R. (2004). Al-Mawrid: A Modern Arabic -English Dictionary . Beirut, Lebanon, Dar El -Elm
Lilmalayin.

Bański, P., J. Bowers and T. Erjavec (2017). TEI-Lex0 guidelines for the encoding of dictionary
information on written and spoken forms . Electronic Lexicography in the 21st Century: Proceedings of
eLex 2017 Conference.

Ben Abderrahmen, M., B. Gargouri and M. Jmaiel (2009). LMF -QL: A Graphical Tool to Query LMF
Databases for NLP and Editorial Use. Human Language Technology. Challenges of the Information
Society. Z. Vetulani and H. Uszkoreit, Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 5603: 279-290.

Burnard, L. and C. Sperberg -McQueen (2012). "TEI Lite: Encoding for Interchange: an introduc -tion to
the TEI Final revised edition for TEI P5."  1(03): 2017.

Consortium, T. (2022 ). "9.5 Typographic and Lexical Information in Dictionary Data" TEI P5: Guidelines
for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. [Version 4.4.0.].[Last updated on 19th April 2022].[Revision
ff9cc28b0].

Costa, R., Roche, C., & Salgado, A. (2022). Standards for representing lexicographic data: An overview .
DARIAH-Campus.

Elleuch, I., B. Gargouri and A. B. Hamadou (2013). Syntactic Enrichment of LMF normalized Arabic
Dictionaries Using Corpora. The 6th Language & Technology Conference (LTC'13).

Elleuch, I., B. Gargouri and A. B. Hamadou (2015). Self-Enrichment of Normalized LMF Dictionaries
Through Syntactic-Behaviors-to-Meanings Links. 18th International Conference Text Speech and Dialogue
(TSD), Plzen, Czech Republic.

Farghaly, A. and K. Shaalan (2009). "Arabic natural language processing: Challenges and solutions." ACM
Transactions on Asian Language Information Processing 8(4): 1-22.

Fayed, D. M., A. A. Fahmy, M. A. Rashwan and W. K. Fayed (2014). Extracting Knowledge from an
Arabic-English Machine-Readable Dictionary Using Information Extraction. 5th International Conference
on Arabic Language Processing (CITALA 2014), Oujda, Morocco.

Francopoulo, G., M. George, N. Calzolari, M. Monachini, N. Bel, M. Pet and C. Soria (2006). Lexical
markup framework (LMF). International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation-LREC 2006.
Gantar, P., L. Colman, C. Parra Escartín and H. Martínez Alonso (2019). "Multiword expressions: between
lexicography and NLP."  32(2): 138-162.

Graff, D. and M. Maamouri (2012). Developing LMF-XML Bilingual Dictionaries for Colloquial Arabic
Dialects. LREC 2012.

Haddar, K., H. Fehri and L. Romary (2012). "A Prototype for Projecting HPSG Syntactic Lexica Towards
LMF." arXiv preprint arXiv:1207.5328 1(27): 21-46.


Hawwari, A., M. Attia and M. Diab (2014). A framework for the classification and annotation of multiword
expressions in dialectal arabic . Proceedings of the EMNLP 2014 Workshop on Arabic Natural Language
Processing (ANLP).

Ide, N., & Véronis, J. (1995). Encoding dictionaries. Computers and the Humanities, 29(2), 167-179.

Jamiu, F. O. and Practice (2014). "Science of Arabic lexicography: A survey of its emergence and
evolution." Journal of Education 5(14).

Karmani, N. B. M., H. Soussou and A. M. Alimi (2014). Building a Standardized WordNet in the ISO LMF
for aeb Language. Proceedings of the 7th Global WordNet Conference (GWC2014). Tartu, Estonia.

Khemakhem, A., I. Elleuch, B. Gargouri and A. B. Hamadou (2009). Towards an Automatic Conversion
Approach of Editorial Arabic Dictionaries into LMF-ISO 24613 Standardized Model. The 2nd International
Conference on Arabic Language Resources & Tools. Cairo, Egypt.

Khemakhem, A., I. Elleuch, B. Gargouri and A. B. Hamadou (2009). Towards an automatic conversion
approach of editorial Arabic dictionaries into LMF -ISO 24613 standardized model . Proceedings of the
Second International Conference on Arabic Language Resources and Tools, Cairo, Egypt.
Khemakhem, A., B. Gargouri, K. Haddar and A. Ben Hamadou (2013). LMF for Arabic. LMF Lexical
Markup Framework. G. Francopoulo, Wiley: 83-98.

Khemakhem, A., B. Gargouri and A. B. Hamadou (2012). LMF standardized dictionary for Arabic
Language. the International Conference on Computing and Information Technology, ICCIT 2012 (2012).

KHEMAKHEM, A., B. GARGOURI, A. B. HAMADOU and G. FRANCOPOULO (2015). "ISO standard
modeling of a large Arabic dictionary." Natural Language Engineering: 1-31.

Lhioui, M., K. Haddar and L. Romary (2014). Towards Modeling Arabic Lexicons Compliant LMF in
OWL-DL. Terminology and Knowledge Engineering 2014, Berlin, Germany.

Loukil, N., K. Haddar and A. Ben Hammadou (2008). "Towards a syntactic lexicon of Arabic verbs." HLT
and NPL within the Arabic World: Arabic Language and Local Languages Processing–Status Updates and
Prospects (LREC 2008). Marrakech, Morocco.

Loukil, N., K. Haddar and A. B. Hamadou (2010). A Syntactic Lexicon for Arabic Verbs. LREC 2010.
Maegaard, B., S. Krauwer, K. Choukri and L. D. Jørgensen (2006). The BLARK concept and BLARK for
Arabic. LREC.

Maks, I., T. Carole and V. V. Remco (2008). Standardising Bilingual Lexical Resources According to the
Lexicon Markup Framework. LREC 2008. Marrakech, Morocco.
Mörth, K. (2017). Arabic lexicography in the internet era. The Routledge Handbook of Lexicography ,
Routledge: 503-517.

Moussa, N. K. E. B. and A. M. Alimi (2015). Construction d’un Wordnet standard pour l’Arabe tunisien.
The second Colloquium for Researcher Students in Natural Language Processing and its Applications
(CEC-TAL 2015).

Namly, D., K. Bouzoubaa, Y. Tahir and H. Khamar (2015). Development of Arabic particles lexicon using
the LMF framework. ACTES DU COLLOQUE: 94.
Ramisch, C. (2015a). Multiword Expressions Acquisition: A Generic and Open Framework . London,
Springer.

Ramisch, C. J. M. E. A. (2015b). "State of the art in MWE processing." 53-102.


Rebdawi, G., S. Desouki and N. Ghneim (2013). "The Interactive Arabic Dictionary: Another
Collaboratively Constructed Language Resource." Journal of Computer Sciences and Applications  1(2):
17-22.

Rebdawi, G., S. Desouki, N. J. J. o. C. S. Ghneim and Applications (2013). "The Interactive Arabic

Dictionary: Another Collaboratively Constructed Language Resource."  1(2): 17-22.
Rebdawi, G., N. Ghneim, M. S. Desouki and R. Sonbol (2011). An Interactive Arabic Dictionary.
International Conference on Innovations in Information Technology (IIT). Abu Dhabi, IEEE.

Salah, R. E. and L. Q. B. Zakaria (2018). Building the classical Arabic named entity recognition corpus
(CANERCorpus). 2018 Fourth International Conference on Information Retrieval and Knowledge
Management (CAMP), IEEE.

Salmon-Alt, S., A. Akrout and L. Romary (2005). Proposals for a normalized representation of Standard
Arabic full form lexica. International Conference on Machine Intelligence.

Soudani, N., I. Bounhas, B. ElAyeb and Y. Slimani (2014). Toward an Arabic Ontology for Arabic Word
Sense Disambiguation Based on Normalized Dictionaries . On the Move to Meaningful Internet Systems:
OTM 2014 Workshops, Springer.

Sulaymonova, N. and Applied Science (2021). "Approach to the history of Arabic lexicography." ISJ
Theoretical: 465-468.

Tasovac, T., L. Romary, P. Banski, J. Bowers, J. d. Does, K. Depuydt, T. Erjavec, A. Geyken, A. Herold,
V. Hildenbrandt, M. Khemakhem, B. Lehečka, S. Petrović, A. Salgado and A. Witt. (2018). "TEI Lex-0: A
baseline encoding for lexicographic data. Version 0.9.1. DARIAH Working Group on Lexical Resources."
from https://dariah-eric.github.io/lexicalresources/pages/TEILex0/TEILex0.html.

Tasovac, T., A. Salgado and R. Costa (2020). "Encoding polylexical units with TEI Lex-o."  8(2): 28-57.
WALI, W., B. GARGOURI and A. B. HAMADOU (2014). A system for evaluating the content of LMF
Arabic dictionaries. CITALA2014. OUJDA,MAROC.

Wilkinson, M. D., Dumontier, M., Aalbersberg, I. J., Appleton, G., Axton, M., Baak, A., ... & Mons, B.
(2016). The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management and stewardship. Scientific data, 3(1),
1-9.


APPENDICES
Appendix A: 4.1 Entry Representation and Lemma Modelling
Entry: Example 2: The entry header is a lemma of a multiword expression (mwe)

Full/Partial Entry صَرَّارُ اللَّيْل  :جُدْجُد   cricket
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entry xml:id=”me-000003” type=”mainEntry” xml:lang=”ar”>
<form type=”lemma”><orth>صَرَّارُياللَّيْل orth></form>
<gramGrp resp=”#DiaaFayed   #LaurentRomary”>
  <gram type=”mwe” value=”N-N”/></gramGrp>
<sense n=”se-01”><pc>:</pc><def>جُدْجُد def>
  <cit type=”translationEquivalent” xml:lang=”en”>
   <form><orth>cricket</orth></form></cit></sense></entry>
Figure 12: a multiword expression header



Entry: Example 3: The header contains more than one lemma. The lemmas are orthographic variants.

Full/Partial Entry عرجُفر، عرجِفر: هرزرلر
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-000004" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
<form type="lemma"><orth>عرجُفي َorth><pc>،pc>
<form type="variant"><orth>عرج في َorth></form></form>
<sense n="se-01"><pc>:</pc><def>هرزرلي َdef></sense></entry>
Figure 13: a multi-lemma header


Entry: Example 4: The entry header has more than one lemma. The lemmas are orthographic variants.

Full/Partial Entry صَُْصُور، صَُْصَُ: بِنْتُ وررْدان  cockroach
 صَُْصُور، صَُْصَُ: جُدْجُدْ، صَرَّارُ اللَّيْل  cricket
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entry xml:id=”me-000004” type=”mainEntry” xml:lang=”ar”>
  <form type=”lemma”><orth>صَُْصُور orth><pc>،pc>
  <form type=”variant” ><orth>صَُْصَُي orth></form></form>
  <sense n=”se-01”><pc>:</pc><def>ب نْتُيوررْدان def></sense>
   <cit type=”translationEquivalent” xml:lang=”en”>
       <form><orth> cockroach</orth></form></cit></sense></entry>
Figure 14: a multi-lemma header
Entry: Example 5: The sub-entry header (صَرْحَة ، آخِرُ صَرْحَة is composed of the lemma and a similar meaning phrase. In
addition, when there are more than one defining words or phrases, we encode each defining phrase in an <gloss> element.

Full/Partial Entry صَرْحرة  :صريْحرة
يييييصَرْحرةي،يآخ رُيصَرْحرة : بِدْعرةٍ، صَرْعرة، مُوضرة
LMF/TEI Lex-0 Encoding <entry xml:id=”me-000006” type=”mainEntry” xml:lang=”ar”>
  <form type=”lemma”><orth>صَرْحرة orth></form>
  <sense n=”se-01”><pc>:</pc><def>صريْحرة def></sense>
  <sense n=”se-02”>
  <form type=”lemma”><orth>صَرْحرة orth></form>
  <form type=”lemma”><orth>آخ رُيصَرْحرة orth></form> <pc>:</pc><def>
       <gloss>مُوضرة gloss><pc>،pc
       <gloss>صَرْعرة gloss><pc>،pc>
       <gloss>ب دْعرةي ٍgloss></def></sense></entry>
Figure 15: a multi-lemma or a multi-phrase header

Entry: Example 6: The sub-entry header (صَرَّحَ بِـ  or صَرَّحَ عَن is composed of the lemma and a preposition.
The headword (صَرَّحَis collocated with prepositions (بِـand (عَن.)
The parenthesis information is encoded as an <gloss> element.

Full/Partial Entry صَرَّحي َ :عْلَنر،يجاهررريب ـي
ّ
أ
   ظْهرر
َ
وْضرحر، أ
َ
صَرَّحر: أ َ
   جرازر، ررخَّص
َ
صَرَّحر بِـ: أ َ
   ِيبرةِ أو الرَّسْم
صَرَّحر عرن (درخْلِهِ أو مُمْترلَكاتِهِ الخاضِعرةِ لِلضّ َّ ِ)
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<sense n="se=03"><form type="lemma"><orth>صَرَّحي َorth></form>
 <gramGrp><gram type="collocate">بيِgram></gramGrp></sense>
<sense n="se=04">
 <form type="lemma"><orth>صَرَّحي َorth></form><gramGrp>
 <gram type="collocate">عني gram></gramGrp>
       <gloss>( ِيبرة يأويالرَّسْم
درخْل ه يأويمُمْترلَكات ه يالخاض عرة يل لضّ َّ ِ)gloss></sense>
Figure 16: a prepositional phrase header

Appendix B: 4.2 Labels, Punctuation, and Semantic Marking

Table 7: Summary Table for labels and abbreviations
Arabic labels
Label Translation Encoding
]
حياء
َ
]
،
...
Sports, Astronomy, Judiciary,
Economics, Geography,
Politics, Biology, Medicine,
Physiology, Religion,
Chemistry
<pc>[</pc>
<usg type=”domain”>
رياضة usg><pc>]</pc>
(نبات)زُعْرُور
(حيوان)ثريْترل
plant
animal
<lbl>نباتlbl>
<lbl>حيوانlbl>
/إلخ/ Etc./ <lbl>إلخlbl>
/راجع /
/ي مكانها
راجعها ف /
/ي أماكنها
راجعها ف /
refer/
/refer it in its place/
/refer them in their places/
<lbl>راجع lbl>
<lbl>ِيمكانها
راجعهايف lbl>
<lbl>راجعهايف يأماكنها lbl>
/ج/ Plural/ <lbl>جlbl>
/مفردها / Singular/ <lbl>مفردها lbl>
/ضد/, /لا/, /غي/ Antonym/ <lbl>ضدlbl>,<lbl>لا</lbl>, <lbl>غي ي lbl>
/إسم/ Noun / <lbl>إسمlbl>
/صفة/ Adjective/ <lbl>صفةlbl>
/أو/ or/ <lbl>أوlbl>
/و/ and/ <lbl>وlbl>
 / مصدر/ infinitive/ <lbl>مصدرlbl>
/طائِفرةٌ مِن َ/ Class of / <lbl>طائ فرةٌيم ني َlbl>
/الفرصِيلَة ُ/ family/ <lbl>الفرص يلَةي ُlbl>


Table 8: Summary Table for labels and abbreviations
Arabic Abbreviations
Abbreviation Translation Encoding
/ج=جرمْع /         Pl. = plural/ <lbl>جlbl>
/ إلخ=إلى آخره / Etc. = Etcetera/ <lbl>إلخlbl>
/نفس  =  علم نفس/ Psych. = Psychology/ <pc>[</pc>
<usg type=”domain”>
نفسusg><pc>]</pc>
/ أحياء = علم أحياء/ Biology = Biology/ <pc>[</pc>
<usg type=”domain”> أحياء
usg><pc>]</pc>
 /نبات =  علم النبات/ plant = Botany/ <lbl>نباتlbl>


Table 9: Summary Table for punctuations, labels and abbreviations.
Arabic punctuations and labels
colon /:/ what comes after them is a definition, interpretation, or explanation of
the material before them.
<pc>:</pc>
comma /،/ separates synonyms or two phrases that have the same meaning or word
has multiple spelling variations.
<pc>،pc>
square bracket /[
]/
contains one or more semantic domain labels <pc>[</pc>
<lbl>لغةlbl>
<pc>]</pc>
parentheses /( )/ ▪ Brackets ( ) are used in many cases, most of which are intended to
increase clarity. Accordingly, it is possible, in general, to omit what is
placed in parentheses, that is, not to read it.
▪ Used in many cases, most of which are intended to increase clarity.
▪ The brackets are also used to denote the type or gender of a noun.
▪ Sometimes used in the cross-reference to determine the referenced
main or branch entry word(words)
<pc>)</pc>
<pc>(</pc>

Ellipse /…/  <pc>…</pc>
Question mark
/?/
 <pc>؟/<pc>
Exclamation mark
/!/
 <pc>!</pc>
dash /-/ Before the cross-reference labels <pc>-</pc>

Table 10: Summary Table for punctuations, labels and abbreviations.
English punctuations and labels
colon /,/ separates synonymous English words <pc>,</pc>
semicolon /;/ separates English words with slightly different connotations or between
shades of convergent meanings, but without being synonymous.
<pc>;</pc>
parentheses /( )/ parentheses can be deleted or retained, because the parentheses
indicate the permissibility of using the word in more than one form or
include another word that is placed besides it or is synonymous with an
adjacent word. for example:
<pc>)</pc>
<pc>(</pc>

Etc. /etc./  <lbl>Etc.</lbl>
Ellipse /…/  <pc>…</pc>
Question mark
/?/
 <pc>?</pc>
Exclamation mark
/!/
 <pc>!</pc>
Plural / Pl./ Pl.=plural




Appendix C: 4.3 Lexical Structure and Reference Modelling

<entry type="mainEntry" xml:id=”me-000001”>
     <entry type="homonymicEntry" xml:id=”he-000001”>
             <sense>
                 <sense n=”se-01”>
                      <sense n=”su-01”></sense>
                      <sense n=”su-02>
                          <cite xml:lang="en"></cite>
                          <cite xml:lang="en"></cite>
                      </sense>
                 </sense>
                 <sense n=”se-02”>
                      <sense n=”su-01”></sense>
                 </sense>
             </sense>
              <entry type="relatedEntry" xml:id=”re-000001”>
…
              </entry>
              <entry type="relatedEntry" xml:id=”re-000002”>
…
              </entry>
     </entry>
     <entry type="homonymicEntry" xml:id=”he-000002”>
     </entry>
</entry>
<entry type="relatedEntry" xml:id=”re-000001”>
    <sense>
            <sense n=”se-01”>
                <sense n=”su-01”></sense>
                                 …
             </sense>
             <sense n=”se-02”>
                <sense n=”su-01”></sense>
                <sense n=”su-02”></sense>
            </sense>
    </sense>
</entry>
<entry type="relatedEntry" xml:id=”re-000002”>
    <sense>
        <sense n=”se-01”>
               <sense n=”su-01”></sense>
               <sense n=”su-02”>
                 <cite xml: lang="en"></cite>
                 <cite xml: lang="en"></cite>
               </sense>
               <sense n=”su-03”></sense>
          </sense>
     </sense>
</entry>
Figure 17: Figure 8: Macrostructure, Microstructure and Referencing system.

Appendix D: 4.4 Multiword Expressions
MWEs: Example 1: The lemma of the entry is a MWE of two words.
Full/Partial Entry صَرَّارُ اللَّيْل  :جُدْجُد   cricke
LMF/TEI Lex-0 Encoding <entry xml:id="me-030303" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
   <form type="lemma"><orth>صَرَّارُياللَّيْل orth></form>
   <gramGrp resp="#DiaaFayed   #LaurentRomary">
      <gram type="mwe" value="N-N"/></gramGrp>
 <sense n="se-01"><pc>:</pc><def>جُدْجُد def></sense></entry>
Figure 18: a MWE lemma
MWEs: Example 2: The lemma of the entry is a MWE of two words. The header contains a semantic field or domain label.
Full/Partial Entry عرمرهٌ حررركِيّ  [ apraxia
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-036984" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
 <form type="lemma"><orth>عرمرهٌيحرررك ِي ّorth></form>
 <gramGrp resp="#DiaaFayed #LaurentRomary">  <gram type="mwe" value="NN-
JJ"></gram></gramGrp>
 <sense n="se-01">  <usg type="domain" value="Medicine">
<pc>[</pc>طبpc>]</pc></usg>
   <cit type="translationEquivalent" xml:lang="en">     <form> <orth>apraxia</orth>
</form> </cit></sense></entry>
Figure 19: a MWE lemma with Semantic Field Label.

MWEs: Example 3: The two subentries are MWE s. The meaning of the collocation can be directly derived from its
individual words. These are called transparent polylexical units.
Full/Partial Entry حْدرقر بِـ، طروَّقر
َ
حراطر بِـ: أ
َ
أ
  حراطر بِدائِررةٍ أو بِشركْلٍ هرنْدرسِيّ
َ
أ
  حراطر بِـ: شرمرلر
َ
أ
  حراطر بِهِ عِلْمًا: عرلِمر بِـ، اِطَّلَعر عل
َ
حراطر بِهِ، أ
َ
أ
   حراطر بِهِ عِلْمًا: فرهِمر
َ
حراطر بِهِ، أ
َ
أ
   طْلَعرهُ عل
َ
عْلَمرهُ بِـ، أ
َ
حراطرهُ عِلْمًا بِـ: أ
َ
أ
   حراطرهُ بِالرِّعرايرةِ أو العِنرايرةِ أو الاهْتمِام
َ
أ–  راجع ررعَر، عُن ِيّ بِـ، اِهْترمَّ بِـ
LMF/TEI Lex-0 Encoding <sense n="se-02"><form type="collocations">
  <form type="collocation"><orth>
  <ref type="form" scope="currentEntry" value="حراطريب ـ
َ
أ"/>
  seg>دائ ررةي ٍlbl>أوlbl>شركْلٍيهرنْدرس ِي ّseg>
  </orth><gramGrp><gram type="mwe" value="V-P-N-A"/>
</gramGrp></form></form></sense>
….
<sense n="se-06"><form type="collocations">
  <form type="collocation"><orth>
  <ref type="form" scope="currentEntry" value="حراطرهُيب ـ
َ
أ"/>
  seg>الرِّعرايرةي ِlbl>أوlbl>الع نرايرةي ِlbl>أوlbl>الاهْتم ام seg>
  </orth><gramGrp><gram type="mwe" value="V-N-P-N"/>
</gramGrp></form></form></sense>
Figure 20: a transparent MWE.
MWEs: Example 4: The two subentries are MWE s. The meaning of the collocation can be directly derived from its
individual words. These are called transparent polylexical units.

Full/Partial Entry عريْن ِيّ: ذُو عرلَرقرةٍ بِالعري ْ
  حرقٌّ عريْن ِيّ، حُقُوقٌ عريْنِيَّة                   right(s) in rem
  مُسراهرمرةٌ عريْنِيَّة contributions in kind
LMF/TEI Lex-0 Encoding <sense n="se=06">
 <form type="collocations">
    <form type="collocation">  <orth><seg>حرق ٌّseg><ref type="oRef"/></orth>
         <gramGrp><gram type="mwe" value="N-A"/></gramGrp>
         <cit type="translation" xml:lang="en"> <quote xml:lang="en">right in
rem</quote></cit> </form><pc>،pc>
    <form type="collocation"> <orth><seg>حُقُوق ٌseg><ref
type="oRef"/><seg>ـةseg></orth>
      <gramGrp><gram type="mwe" value="N-A"/></gramGrp></form>
      <cit type="translation" xml:lang="en">  <quote xml:lang="en">rights in
rem</quote></cit></form></form></sense>
<sense n="se=07">
 <form type="collocations"><form type="collocation"><orth>
  <seg>مُسراهرمرةي ٌseg><ref type="oRef"/><seg>ـةseg></orth></form>
   <gramGrp><gram type="mwe" value="N-A"/></gramGrp></form>
 <cit type="translation" xml:lang="en">  <quote xml:lang="en">contributions in
kind</quote></cit></sense>
Figure 21: a transparent MWE.
MWEs: Example 5: transparent polylexical unit.
Full/Partial Entry عري ْ ُيالف عْل  [second radical of a verb
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<sense n="se-18"><form type="collocations"><form
type="collocation">
 <orth><ref type="oRef"/><seg>الف عْل seg></orth>
 <gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="mwe" value="N-
N"/></gramGrp></form></form>

 <usg type="domain"
value="Language"><pc>[</pc>لغةpc>]</pc></usg>
 <cit type="translation">
  <quote xml:lang="en">second radical of a
verb</quote></cit></sense>
Figure 22: LMF/TEI-Lex0 code of a transparent MWE with semantic field label.
MWEs: Example 6: Encoding of a transparent MWE and semantic field.

Full/Partial Entry اسْمُيعري ْ ني  [concrete noun
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<sense n="se-20"><form type="collocations"><form
type="collocation">
<orth><seg>اسْم ُseg><ref type="oRef"/></orth>
<gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="mwe" value="N-
N"/></gramGrp></form></form>
<usg type="domain"
value="Language"><pc>[</pc>لغةpc>]</pc></usg>
<cit type="translationEquivalent" xml:lang="en">
  <form><orth>concrete noun</orth></form></cit></sense>
Figure 23: LMF/TEI-Lex0 code of a transparent MWE with semantic field label.
MWEs: Example 7: Encoding a non-transparent sense-related MWE.
Full/Partial Entry عري ْ ُيالشَّمْسي وبرال (حرجررٌ كَرِيم)
ُ
: أopal
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<sense n="se-17">
    <entry xml:id="re-377377" type="relatedEntry" xml:lang="ar">
    <form type="lemma"><orth> عري ْ ُيالشَّمْس orth></form>
   <gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="mwe" value="N-N"/></gramGrp>
        <sense n="se-01"><pc>:</pc><def>وبرال
ُ
أgloss>(حرجررٌيكَرِيم ) gloss></def>
       <cit type="translationEquivalent"
xml:lang="en"><form><orth>opal</orth></form></cit></sense></entry></sense>
Figure 24: LMF/TEI-Lex0 code of non-transparent sense-related MWEs.
MWEs: Example 8: Encoding a non-transparent sense-related MWE.

Full/Partial
Entry
عري ْ ُياله ر ي : حرجررٌ نِصْفُ كَرِيم        cat’s-eye
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<sense n="se-19">
    <entry xml:id="re-333433" type="relatedEntry" xml:lang="ar">
        <form type="lemma"><orth> عري ْ ُياله ر ّorth></form>
        <gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="mwe" value="N-N"/></gramGrp>
       <sense n="se-01"><pc>:</pc><def>حرجررٌين صْفُيكَرِيم def>
           <cit type="translationEquivalent" xml:lang="en"><form><orth>cat’s-eye</orth>
               </form></cit>
        </sense></entry>
</sense>
Figure 25: LMF/TEI-Lex0 code of non-transparent sense-related MWEs.
MWEs: Example 9: Encoding lexicographically non-transparent entry-related MWE.
Full/Partial Entry العري ْ ُيب العري ْ ي     an eye for an eye, tit for tat
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-334140" type="relatedEntry" xml:lang="ar">
><orth>"lemma"=type <formالعري ْ ُيب العري ْ يييييييييي orth></form>
      <gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="mwe" value="N-P-N"/></gramGrp>
      <sense n="se-01">
           <cit type="translation" xml:lang="en"><quote>an eye for an  eye</quote>

                </cit><pc>,</pc>
           <cit type="translation" xml:lang="en"><quote>tit for tat</quote></cit></sense></entry>

Figure 26: LMF/TEI-Lex0 code of non-transparent entry-related MWEs.

MWEs: Example 10: Encoding lexicographically non-transparent entry-related MWE.




Figure 27: LMF/TEI-Lex0 code of non-transparent entry-related MWEs.

Appendix E: 4.5 Cross-Referencing: Resolving Implicit Links
4.5.1 Example 1: Cross-Reference Phrase without Targets.
● The dash symbol “ـis encoded using the <pc> (punctuation) element.
● The keyphrase used for the cross -reference, such as "راجعها في أماكنهاis encoded using the <lbl>
(label) element.
● The keyphrase "راجعها في أماكنهاis not followed by any <ref> element or specific reference target.
● In this instance, the <ref> elements were added by the author of the paper for clarification.
● The absence of explicit reference targets after the phrase "راجعها في أماكنهاis considered a deficiency
in the original dictionary structure.
● Reference targets, when present, are composed of two parts: the entry identifier and the sense
identifier.
Full/Partial Entry عاتِق:  كَتِف
     عاتِقُ المِي  انِ أو المِحْراثِ ...
     لْقَر، ورقرعر) عل عاتِقه
َ
خرذر (أ
َ
أ– ي أماكنها
راجعها ف ...
خرذر
َ
أ : ترنراورلر، نرالر     ...
   خرذر عل عاتِقِه أو نرفْسِه (معن
َ
أ22 ... )
لْقَ
َ
أ :ررمَر، قرذرفر    ...
   لْقَر عل عاتِقِهِ كَذرا (معن
َ
أ19 ... )
ورقرعر  :سرقرطر    ...
   ورقرعر عل عاتِقِه (معن  17  ...  )
خرذر:  ترنراورلر، نرالر
َ
أ
   خرذر عل عاتِقِه أو نرفْسِه (معن
َ
أ22 )
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<xr type="synonym">   <pc>ـيpc>  <lbl>ِيأماكنها
راجعهايف lbl>
   <ref type="sense" target="#me-001625.se-22">خرذي
َ
أَref><pc>،pc>
   <ref type="sense" target="#me-006840.se-19">لْق ري
َ
أref><pc>،pc>
   <ref type="sense" target="#me-057995.se-17">ورقرعي َref></xr>
Figure 28: Cross-Reference phrase without targets.

Full/Partial Entry ب العري ْ ِيالمُجررَّدرة             with the naked (or unaided) eye
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
>"ar"=xml:lang "relatedEntry"=type "me=334141"=xml:id <entry
><orth>"lemma"=type <formب العري ْ ِيالمُجررَّدرةييييي orth></form>
/></gramGrp>N"-N-"P=value "mwe"=type ><gram"#DF #LR"=resp <gramGrp
>"en"=xml:lang "translation"=type ><cit01"-"se=n <sense
eye </pc>)<pc>or unaided</pc>(<pc>with the naked <quote>
</quote></cit> </sense></entry>

4.5.2 Example 2: Cross-Reference to Multiple Senses
● The dash “ـis encoded using the <pc> element, and the keyword "راجعis marked using the <lbl>
element.
● The keyword "راجعrefers to three different senses from separate entries.
● Both the dash and the keyword are included within an <xr> element, representing the cross-reference
structure.
● The attribute @type="synonym" within the <xr> element indicates that the relationship between the
subentry and the referenced senses or entries is one of synonymy.
Full/Partial Entry حراطريب ـ
َ
أ: حْدرقي
َ
أَ ب ـي، طروَّق َ  ...
  حراطرهُ بِالرِّعرايرةِ أو العِنرايرةِ أو الاهْتِمام ـ راجع ررعَر، عُن ِير بِـ، اِهْترمَّ بِـ
َ
أ  ...
ررعَر: عُن ِير بِـ، حرفِظَ
   ررعَر: ترعرهَّدر، نرمََّّ
   ررعَر  :حافرظَ عل، اِحْيَررمر، ترقريَّدر بِـ ـ راجع راعَر
   ررعَر: حركَمر، سادر، طُبِّقر عل
   ررعَر الماشِيرةر أو القرطِيعر
   ررعرتِ الماشِيرةُ
   ررعري  (النُّجُومر إلخ): راقربر –  راجع راعَر  ...
عُن ِير بِـ  :اِهْترمَّ بِـ  ...
ا هْترمَّي   ب ـ: قرلِقر
  اِهْترمَّ بِـ: اِغْترمَّ
  اِهْترمَّ بِـ: عُن ِير بِـ
  اِهْترمَّ بِـ: بالىَ بِ، حرفرلر بِ
LMF/TEI Lex-0 Encoding <xr type="synonym"> <pc>ـpc>    <lbl>راجع lbl>
    <ref type="entry" target="#me-003700">ررعري ref> <pc>،pc>
    <ref type="entry" target="#me-004155">عُن  ِريب ـ ref><pc>،pc>
    <ref type="entry" target="#me-002784">ا هْترمَّيب ـ ref></xr>
Figure 29: Cross-reference phrase for more than one refers.
4.5.3 Example 3: Cross-Reference to a Multiword Expression (MWE)
● In this example, the keyword "راجعrefers to the phrase "على أَثَرِ كَذَا which is treated as a multiword
expression (MWE) and appears as a subentry under the headword "أَثَر."
● Occasionally, the author assists users by including the headword of the referred entry in
parentheses—e.g., "(أَثَر")—immediately after the cross-reference.
● This parenthetical inclusion is rare and represents an exception to the typical implicit referencing
pattern used in the dictionary.
Full/Partial Entry ثرر
َ
أ ثِي ، مرفْعُول
ْ
ترأ
   ثررِ كَذرا
َ
عل أثررِ كَذرا
َ
ي أ
، ف


إثْرَ، راجع إثْرِ كَذا ـ  ي
ف  ثرر
َ
ثررِ كَذرا (أ
َ
عل أ)
LMF/TEI Lex-0 Encoding <xr type="synonym"> <pc>ـpc>   <lbl>راجع lbl>
   <ref type="sense" target="#me-000760.se-02">ثررِيكَذراي
َ
علىيأref>
   <pc>(</pc>ثرر
َ
أpc>)</pc></xr>
Figure 30: Cross-Reference to a Multiword Expression (MWE).
4.5.4 Example 4: Complete Cross-Reference.
● In Figure 9, the cross-reference is complete, meaning there is full semantic alignment between the
referring and referred entries.
● Specifically, the headword "فَهَّمَand the referenced word "أَفْهَمshare all their senses without
discrepancy.
● This allows the reference to be encoded with a clear @target attribute pointing to the full set of
senses under the referenced entry.


Full/Partial Entry فْهرمر
َ
فرهَّمر راجع أ
…
    فْهرمي
َ
أَ
LMF/TEI Lex-0 Encoding <xr type="synonymy"><pc>ـpc><lbl>راجع lbl>
  <ref type="mainEntry" target="#me-005903">فْهرم
َ
أَref></xr>
Figure 31: Complete Cross-Reference (refer to all the meanings).
4.5.5 Example 5: Partial Cross-Reference
● In Figure 10, the cross-reference points to a specific sense rather than the full lexical entry.
● The referring subentry "فَرَضَ: حَز َّlinks to a particular sense of the entry "فَرَّض َusing a target such
as #me-38951.
● This example illustrates scoped synonymy, where only one meaning is shared across otherwise
distinct entries.

Full/Partial Entry فرررضر: حرزَّ ـ راجع فررَّضر
…
فررَّضري : حرزَّ
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<xr type="synonymy">  <pc>ـpc>  <lbl>راجع lbl>
  <ref type="mainEntry" target="#me-038951.se-01">فررَّضي َref></xr>
Figure 32: FPartial Cross-reference (only one meaning).
Appendix F: 4.6 Parenthesis Information: Resolving Structural Ambiguity
         Parenthesis Information: Example: 1:
Full/Partial Entry عُوريْل م  ي ترصْنيفِ الأرحْياء)
(ف
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entryxml:id="me-001001" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
    <form type="lemma"><orth>عُوريْل م gloss>(ِيي
ترصْنيف يف
الأحْياء )gloss></orth></form></entry>
Figure 33: Code of unstructured parenthetical information.
             Parenthesis Information: Example: 2
Full/Partial Entry عرلامرة   (مردْررسَّية، عرل إمْتِحانٍ إلخ)
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entryxml:id="me-001002" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
    <form type="lemma"> <orth>عرلامرة gloss>(مردْررسَّية، عرل إمْتِحانٍ إلخ )gloss>
        </orth></form></entry>
Figure 34: Code of unstructured parenthetical information.
             Parenthesis Information: Example: 3
Full/Partial Entry عرلَرمرةُيتررْق يمي (كَالنُّقْطرةِ و الفاصِلَة)
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entryxml:id="me-001003" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
   <form type="lemma"><orth>عرلَرمرةُيتررْق يم gloss>(كَالنُّقْطرة يويالفاص لَة )gloss>
     </orth></form></entry>
Figure 35: Code of unstructured parenthetical information.
              Parenthesis Information: Example: 4
Full/Partial Entry عرمِيد: سريِّد، ررئِيس (حِزْبٍ، جرمراعرةٍ إلخ
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-001004" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
  <form type="lemma"><orth>عرم يد orth></form>
  <sense n="se-01"><pc>:</pc><def><gloss>سريِّد gloss><pc>،pc>
      <gloss>ررئ يس gloss>(ح زْبٍ،يجرمراعرةٍيإلخ )gloss></gloss></def></sense></entry>
Figure 36: Code of unstructured parenthetical information.

           Parenthesis Information: Example: 5
Full/Partial Entry غريَّمر (ـتِ السَّمراءُ –  راجع غامر (ـتِ السَّمراءُ)
LMF/TEI Lex-0 Encoding <entry xml:id="me-001005" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
<form type="lemma"><orth>غريَّم َgloss>(ـت يالسَّمراءي ُ)gloss></orth></form>
<sense n="se-01"><pc>-</pc><lbl>راجع lbl><xr type="synonym">
<ref type="sense" target="#me-343434">غامَgloss>(ـت يي
السَّمراءي ُ)gloss></ref></xr></sense></entry>
Figure 37: Code of unstructured parenthetical information.
           Parenthesis Information: Example: 6

Full/Partial Entry فرتَّشري  (شرخْصًا بِجرسِّ ثِيرابِه برحْثًا عن سِلَرح)
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-001007" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
    <form type="lemma"> <orth>فرتَّشي َgloss>
         (شرخْصًايب جرسِّيث يراب هيبرحْثًايعنيس لَرح )gloss></orth></form></entry>
Figure 38: Code of unstructured parenthetical information.
             Parenthesis Information: Example: 7

Full/Partial Entry ف عْل يًّا  - راجع فِعْلَا، بِالفِعْل (فِعْل)
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-001010" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
  <form type="lemma"> <orth>ف عْل يًّا orth></form>
     <sense n="se-01"><pc>-</pc><lbl>راجع lbl><xr type="synonym">
      <ref type="entry" target="#me-001400">ف عْلًَي ref> <pc>،pc>
      <ref type="entry" target="#me-003255">ب الف عْل  gloss>
         (<gloss>(ف عْل )gloss>)</gloss></ref> </xr></sense></entry>
Figure 39: Code of unstructured parenthetical information.
Appendix G: 4.7 Synonymy: Modelling Semantic Equivalence
Appendix H: 4.8 Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge Modelling
         Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge: Example: 1
Full/Partial Entry عرج يبرةيي (ج عرجرائِب): يعْجُوبرة،يمُعْج زرةي
ُ
أ
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-035404" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
 <form type="lemma"><orth>عرج يبرة orth></form><form type="inflected">
 <pc>(</pc><lbl>جlbl/><orth>عرجرائ ب orth><pc>)</pc>
 <gramGrp><gram type="number" value="plural"/></gramGrp>
 </form><sense n="se-1"><pc>:</pc> <def><gloss>عْجُوبرةي
ُ
أgloss><pc>،pc>
 <gloss>مُعْج زرة gloss></def></sense></entry>
Figure 40: Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge.
             Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge: Example: 2
Full/Partial Entry عرجرائِب (مفردها عرجِيبرة - راجع عرجِيبرة
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-035317" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
 <form type="lemma"><orth>عرجرائ ب orth></form><form type="inflected">
 <pc>(</pc><lbl>مفردها lbl><orth>عرج يبرة orth><pc>)</pc>
 <gramGrp><gram type="number" value="singular"/></gramGrp>
 </form><pc>-</pc><lbl>راجع lbl>
 <sense n="se-01"><xr type="inflected">
 <ref target="#me-035404" type="entry">عرج يبرة ref></xr><sense></entry>
Figure 41: Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge.



Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge: Example: 3

Full/Partial Entry نَدٍ (النَّدِي:) مُبْتَلّ
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-054156" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
   <form type="lemma"><orth>نردي ٍorth>
      <gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="pos"
value="N"/></gramGrp></form>
   <form type="inflected"><pc>(</pc><orth>النَّد ي orth><pc>)</pc>
     <gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="pos"
value="N"/></gramGrp></form>
  <sense n="se-01"><pc>:</pc><def>مُبْترلي ّdef></sense></entry>
Figure 42: Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge.
Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge: Example: 4

Full/Partial Entry وَسَط  (أوْساط): دائِرَة (دَوَائِر)، مَحْفِل (مَحَافِل)
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-057506" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar"><form type="lemma">
   <orth>ورسرط orth></form><form
type="inflected"><pc>(</pc><orth>أوْساط orth><pc>)</pc>
   <gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="number" value="plural"/></gramGrp></form>
   <sense n="se-3"><pc>:</pc><def>دائ ررة def><form
ype="inflected"><pc>(</pc><orth>درورائ ر orth><pc>)</pc>
   <gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="number"
value="plural"/></gramGrp></form><pc>،pc>
     <def>مرحْف ل def><form type="inflected"><pc>(</pc><orth>مرحراف ل orth><pc>)</pc>
   <gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="number"
value="plural"/></gramGrp></form></sense></entry>
Figure 43: Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge.

  Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge: Example: 5
Full/Partial Entry راهَقَ: صارَ مُرَاهِقاً
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-26200" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
<form type="lemma"><orth>راهرق َorth>
   <gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="pos"
value="V"/></gramGrp></form>
<form type="derivative"><lbl>صاري َlbl><orth>مُرراه قا ًorth>
    <gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="pos"
value="N"/></gramGrp></form>
<sense n="se-01"><pc>:</pc><def>صارريمُرراه قا ًdef></sense></entry>
Figure 44: Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge.

      Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge: Example: 6
Full/Partial Entry خِلْطِي : مَنْسُوبٌ إلى  الخِلْط
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-23559" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
<form type="lemma"><orth>خ لْط ِي ّorth>
   <gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="pos"
value="ADJ"/></gramGrp></form>
<form type="derivative"><lbl> مرنْسُوبي ٌ
إلىlbl><orth>الخ لْط orth><gramGrp resp="#DF #LR">
  <gram type="pos" value="N"/></gramGrp></form>
<sense n="se-01"><pc>:</pc><def>مرنْسُوبٌيإلىيالخ لْط def></sense></entry>
Figure 45: Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge.

                  Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge: Example: 7
Full/Partial Entry نران ِيّ
َ
ثِر: أ
َ
أصفة  (
يييييث ر
َ
أنران ِيّ (اسم  (
َ
: أ
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-000777" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
 <form type="lemma"><orth>ث ر
َ
أorth></form>

 <entry xml:id="ho-01" xml:lang="ar" type="homonymicEntry">
  <sense n="se-01"><pc>:</pc>
   <def>نران  ِي
َ
أّdef><pc>(</pc><lbl>اسمlbl><pc>)</pc>
   <gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="POS" value="N"/>
   </gramGrp></sense></entry>
 <entry xml:id="ho-02" xml:lang="ar" type="homonymicEntry">
  <sense n="se-01"><pc>:</pc>
   <def>نران  ِي
َ
أّdef><pc>(</pc><lbl>صفةlbl><pc>)</pc>
   <gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="POS" value="ADJ"/>
   </gramGrp></sense></entry></entry>
Figure 46: Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge.

             Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge: Example: 8
Full/Partial Entry ساورقر: ناغرمر، جرعرلَهُ مُترسراوِقاً
LMF/TEI Lex -0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-028719" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
<form type="lemma"><orth>ساورق َorth><gramGrp resp="#DF #LR">
<gram type="pos" value="V"/></gramGrp></form><form type="derived">
<lbl>جرعرلَهي ُlbl><orth>مُترسراوِقا ًorth><gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="pos"
value="ADJ"/>
</gramGrp></form><sense n="se-01"><pc>:</pc><def><gloss>ناغرمي َgloss>
<pc>،pc><gloss>جرعرلَهُيمُترسراوِقا gloss></def></sense></entry>
Figure 47: Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge.

             Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge: Example: 9
Full/Partial Entry مُبرلِّط: فاعِل برلَّط
LMF/TEI Lex -0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-045287" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
<form type="lemma"><orth>مُبرلِّط orth></form>
<gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="pos" value="N"/></gramGrp>
<form type="derived"><gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="pos"
value="V"/></gramGrp>
<orth>برلَّطي َorth></form><sense n="se-01"><pc>:</pc><def> فاع ليي
برلَّط def></sense></entry>
Figure 48: Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge.

            Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge: Example: 10
Full/Partial Entry  اِبْتِغاء: مرصْدرر اِبْترغ ر
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-000197" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
<form type="lemma"><orth>ا بْت غاء orth></form>
<gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="pos" value="N"/></gramGrp>
<form type="derived"><gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="pos"
value="V"/></gramGrp>
<orth>ا بْترغ ري orth></form><sense n="se-01"><pc>:</pc><def>مرصْدرريي
ا بْترغ ري def></sense></entry>
Figure 49: Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge.

       Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge: Example: 11
Full/Partial Entry ترصرالَحر: ضِدّ ترخراصرمر
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-25565" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
<form type="lemma"><orth>ترصرالَح َorth></form>
<gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="POS" value="V"/></gramGrp>
<sense n="se-01"><pc>:</pc><def> ض د يترخراصرمي َdef>
<xr type="antonymy" resp="#DF #LR">
<ref target="#me-013006.se-01" ype="sense">ترخراصرمي َref>
 </xr></sense></entry>
Figure 50: Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge.



Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge: Example: 12
Full/Partial
Entry
حُمََّّ: حررراررة
LMF/TEI Lex -0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-20565" type="mainEntry"  xml:lang="ar">
<form type="lemma"><orth>حُمَّّي orth></form>
<sense n="se-01"><pc>:</pc><def>حررراررة def><pc>[</pc>
<usg type="domain"
value="medicine"><lbl>طبlbl></usg><pc>]</pc></sense></entry>
Figure 51: Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge.


             Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge: Example: 13
Full/Partial Entr عابِدمرنْي  يرعْبُدُ
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-034848" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
<form type="lemma"><orth>عاب دorth>
<gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="pos"
value="N"/></gramGrp></form>
<form type="derived"><orth>يرعْبُدي ُorth>
<gramGrp resp="#DF #LR"><gram type="pos"
value="V"/></gramGrp></form>
</pc><def>:><pc>01"-"se=n <senseمرنْييرعْبُدُي def></sense></entry>
Figure 52: Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge.


        Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge: Example: 14
Full/Partial Entry عارِيراتُيالي ُ ُور : طائ فرةٌيم نريالنَّبراتاتي
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-034962"  type="mainEnry" xml:lang="ar">
<form type="lemma"><orth> عارِيراتُيالي ُ ُور orth></form> <sense n="se-01"><pc>:</pc>
<def> طائ فرةٌيم نريالنَّبراتات def><xr type="hypernymy"><lbl>طائ فرةٌيم ني َ lbl>
<ref type="entry" target="#me-053763">النَّبراتات ref></xr></sense></entry>
Figure 53: Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge.

       Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge: Example: 15
Full/Partial Entry  زُرْقُطرة (حشرة
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entry type="mainEntry"><form type="lemma"><orth>زُرْقُطرة orth>
</form><xr type="hypernymy"><ref type="entry">
<gloss>(حشرة )gloss></ref></xr></entry>
Figure 54: Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge.

       Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge: Example: 17
Full/Partial Entry  زُعْرُور(نبات
LMF/TEI Lex-0 Encoding <entry type="mainEntry"><form
type="lemma"><orth>زُعْرُور orth>
</form><xr type="hypernymy"><ref type="entry">
<gloss>(نبات)gloss></ref></xr></entry>
Figure 55: Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge.


Table 11: Information Types, Examples, and Encoding.
Information
Category
Information Type explicit
/
implicit
Example LMF/LEX0
orthographic
variation explicit عرجُفر ، عرجِفر : هرزرلر

form type="lemma">
morphologic
inflection: number (singular) explicit عرجرائِب مفردها  عرجِيبرة) ـ
راجع عرجِيبرة
form
type="variant"><orth>
</orth>
inflection: number (plural) explicit عرجِيبرة ج  عْجُوبرة،
ُ
عرجرائِب): أ
مُعْجِزرة
form> <form
type="variant"><orth>
</orth></form></form>
inflection: number (plural) implicit ورسرط (أوْساط): دائِررة
(درورائِر)، مرحْفِل (مرحرافِل)
form
type="inflected">
inflection: active participles (اسميي
فاعل)
explicit هادٍ (ال هادِي ): مُرْشِد  form
type="inflected">
derivation: deverbal nouns (مصدر
maSdar)
explicit اِبْتِغاء مرصْدرري  اِبْترغ ر  form
type="inflected">
  implicit مُبرلِّط فاع ل  برلَّطر  form
type="inflected">
  implicit خِلْطِيّ مرنْسُوبٌيإلىي الخِلْط  form
type="derivation">
  implicit راهرقر صارري مُرراهِقاً  form
type="derivation">
  implicit ساورقر: ناغرمر، جرعرلَهُ مُترسراوِقاً  form
type="derivation">
syntactic
part-of-speech: noun explicit نران ِيّ
َ
ثِر: أ
َ
(أصفةي
(اسم)  عالِم:عالِم
form
type="derivation">
part-of-speech: adj explicit نران ِيّ
َ
ثِر: أ
َ
أاسم(
عالِمٌ بِـ :عالِم ( صفةي (
form
type="derivation">
Illustrative
example
example explicit هرمَّمر ـتِ الأُمُّ الطِّفْلر ( gram type="pos"
value="NN">
context gloss annotation, comment, … explicit صادرفر ي تارِيــــخٍ مُعري َّ )
ف  gram type="pos"
value="ADJ">


Table 12: Information Types, Examples, and Encoding.
semantic
Semantic field (domain) explicit حُمََّّ: حررراررة طبي ]  <usg type="domain"
value="medicine">
طبusg>
antonyms explicit عاقّ :عرقُوق، ض د ي  بارّ
ترصرالَحر:  ض د ي  ترخراصرمر
xr type="antonymy">
antonyms explicit اِتِّفرافَِيّ لاي إررادِيّ      ref target=””,
type=””>
antonyms explicit ثابِتغري ُْي  مُترحررِّكٍ
synonyms implicit قاترلر، شاجررر :عارركر
عارِيرة، عارِيَّة: قررْض

explicit ي إثْرِ كَذا ـ
(إثْرر، ف راجع  ثررِ
َ
عل أ
كَذرا  (ثرر
َ
أ
xr type="synonym"
<ref target=””
type="sense"></ref>
</xr>
explicit فرهَّمر  راجع  فْهرمري
َ
أ
 implicit فِكْررةٌ عِبراررةٌ ، صِيْغرة ( مُبْترذرلَة
 implicit طررِيقرةٌ  )أو سْلُوب (ٌ
ُ
أ ي العريْش
ف

hypernym/hyponym relation: animal-
of
explicit خريْلان ِيّ حريروانٌيم نري
الخريْلانِيَّات

hypernym/hyponym relation: order-
of
explicit لاذرنربِيَّات  رُتْبرةٌيم نري   اليَرْمائِيَّات  xr type="hypernym"
<ref
type="entry"></ref>
</xr>
hypernym/hyponym relation: class-of explicit عارِيراتُ اليَُ ُور طائِفرةٌ مِنر
النَّبراتات
usg type="domain"
value="medicine">
طبusg>
hypernym/hyponym relation: flock-of  ررفّ جرمراعرةٌ مِنر  الطَّي ِْ  xr type="antonymy">
Meronym/Holonym relation:
member-of
 نائِبي
عُضْو ف ) مرجْلِسِ
النُّوَّاب(
    ref target=””,
type=””>
Meronym/Holonym relation:
member-of
 زرمِيل ي
عُضْوٌ ف  جرمْعِيةٍ عِلْمِيَّةٍ
دربِيَّة
َ
أو أ

Meronym/Holonym relation:
member-of
 ررجُلُ عِصرابرة، ي
عُضْوٌ ف  عِصرابر
Meronym/Holonym relation: part-of  عُضْو مِنْ عْضاءِ الجِسْم(
َ
أ xr type="synonym"
<ref target=””
type="sense"></ref>
</xr>
Meronym/Holonym relation:
member-of
 عُضْو ي
ف  جرمْعِيَّة إلخ(
Meronym/Holonym relation: part-of  فِقْررة جُزْء مِنْ ) بررْنامرجٍ أو
حرفْلَةٍ إلخ (

Meronym/Holonym relation: part-of  قِسْط جُزْءٌ  مُقرسَّطٌ مِنْ دريْن
Meronym/Holonym relation: part-of  قرلَمُ السِّمرة: جُزْءٌ مِنْ مِدرقَّةِ
الزرهْررةِ يرحْمِلُ السِّمرةر

hypernym/hyponym relation: genus-
of plant
implicit زرنْبرقُ الماء نبات( xr type="hypernym"
<ref
type="entry"></ref>
</xr>
hypernym/hyponym relation: genus-
of animals
implicit بُو ذرقْن
َ
أحيوان ( usg type="domain"
value="medicine">
طبusg>
human/profession: thematic, agent,
actor
implicit عابِدمرنْي  يرعْبُدُ  xr type="antonymy">



Appendix I: 4.9 Homonym Modelling: Resolving Grammatical Ambiguity
Appendix J: 4.10 Illustrative Examples and Contextual Cues


Full/Partial
Entry
وافرقر  :ي تارِيــــخٍ مُعري َّ )
صادرفر (ف
LMF/TEI Lex -0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-056870" type="mainEntry" xml:lang="ar">
<form type="lemma"><orth>وافرق َorth></form><gramGrp resp="#DF #LR">
<gram type="POS" value="V"/></gramGrp><sense n="se-01"><pc>:</pc>
<def>صادرفي َdef><gloss>( ِيتارِيــــخنيمُعري َّ ي
ف )gloss></sense></entry>
Figure 56: Examples and Context Words.
Full/Partial Entry هرمَّمر (ـتِ الأُمُّ الطِّفْلر
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<entry xml:id="me-056491" type="mainEntry"  xml:lang="ar">
<form type="lemma"><orth>هرمَّم َorth></form>
<cit type="example"><quote> <pc>(</pc> ـت يالأُمُّيي
الطِّفْل َpc>)</pc>هرمَّم َquote></cit></entry>
Figure 57: Examples and Context Words.
Appendix K: 4.11 Translation Equivalence and Semantic Granularity


Full/Partial Entry إِثْمsin, wrongdoing; offense, fault, misdeed; iniquity; guilt
LMF/TEI Lex-0
Encoding
<sense n="se=01">
<sense n="su-01">
<cit type="translationEquivalent" xml:lang="en">
<form><orth>sin</orth></form></cit><pc>,</pc>
<cit type="translationEquivalent" xml:lang="en">
</cit><pc>,</pc><form><orth>wrongdoing</orth></form>
</cit></sense><pc>;</pc>
<sense n="su-02">
<cit type="translationEquivalent" xml:lang="en">
<form><orth>offense</orth></form></cit><pc>,</pc>
<cit type="translationEquivalent" xml:lang="en">
</cit><pc>,</pc><form><orth>fault</orth></form>
</cit><cit type="translationEquivalent" xml:lang="en">
</cit><pc>,</pc><form><orth>misdeed</orth></form>
</cit></sense><pc>;</pc>
<sense n="su-03"><cit type="translationEquivalent" xml:lang="en">
<form><orth>iniquity</orth></form></cit><pc>,</pc></sense>
<pc>;</pc><sense n="su-04">
<cit type="translationEquivalent" xml:lang="en">
<form><orth>guilt</orth></form></cit><pc>,</pc></sense>
</sense>
</entry>
Figure 58: Translations
