HIERARCHICAL MUON: TILED NEWTON–SCHULZ UPDATES
FOR EFFICIENT MUON OPTIMIZATION
ZIYUAN TANG∗, TIANSHI XU†, YOUSEF SAAD∗,ANDYUANZHE XI†
Abstract.Muon-type optimizers construct update directions for dense neural-network weights
by applying a finite Newton–Schulz map to momentum-gradient matrices. For anH×Wmatrix,
withr= min{H, W}ands= max{H, W},Ksteps of the full-matrix Newton–Schulz update require
O(r2sK) work and couple all rows and columns through repeated Gram matrix products. We
introduce Hierarchical Muon (HiMuon), a tiled Newton–Schulz scheme for Muon-type optimization.
HiMuon partitions each momentum-gradient matrix intoT×Ttiles, applies the same finite Newton–
Schulz map independently to each tile, and reassembles the results. For finiteTbelow the matrix
dimensions, HiMuon defines a local matrix-function map rather than a convergent approximation
to the full-matrix update: spectral interactions are preserved within tiles and discarded across tile
boundaries. For fixed finiteT, the leading Newton–Schulz work decreases toO(HWTK), and the
computation decomposes into independent small dense matrix operations. This structure enables tile-
size-dependent GPU kernels, cross-layer batching, memory-bounded chunking, and runtime tile-size
schedules. Experiments on transformer training and controlled matrix-function diagnostics show that
HiMuon improves optimizer-step efficiency while keeping training behavior close to full-matrix Muon
in the tested regimes. Our implementation is publicly available at https://github.com/tang0389/
himuon.
Key words.Newton–Schulz iteration, tiled matrix-function updates, polar decomposition, LLM
training, batched GPU linear algebra, finite-precision arithmetic
MSC codes.65F30, 90C06, 68T07
1. Introduction.In transformer models, a large share of the parameter count
and arithmetic cost is concentrated in dense projection matrices in the attention and
feed-forward sublayers. The gradients of these parameters inherit the same matrix
form. Muon-type optimizers exploit this structure by applying a finite Newton–Schulz
(NS) iteration to the momentum-gradient matrix associated with each matrix param-
eter [15]. The output is used as the update direction. This finite-step matrix function
acts as a polar-factor surrogate: it drives the singular values of the update direction
toward a common scale. Such matrix-function updates have been shown empirically
to improve pretraining efficiency across several model scales [21, 31, 26].
The full-matrix Newton–Schulz map is a major computational component of the
Muon optimizer step. For anH×Wmomentum-gradient matrix, letr= min{H, W}
ands= max{H, W}. With the iteration oriented so that the Gram matrix has
dimensionr,KNewton–Schulz steps require
O(r2sK) =O(HWmin{H, W}K)
operations. WhenH≤W, this becomesO(H2WK). The repeated Gram matrix
products also create global spectral coupling: an entry of the update can depend on
the entire momentum-gradient matrix. Thus the computational cost of the update
and its spectral behavior are linked. Retaining full-matrix spectral coupling gives
the standard Muon update, but doing so at every optimizer step requires large dense
matrix products. In distributed parameter-sharded training, the full-matrix Newton–
∗Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis
(tang0389@umn.edu, saad@umn.edu). The research of Tang and Saad is supported by the NSF
award DMS-2513117.
†Department of Mathematics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322 (tianshi.xu@emory.edu,
yxi26@emory.edu). The research of Xi and Xu is supported by NSF award DMS-2513118.
1arXiv:2606.27216v1  [math.NA]  25 Jun 2026
2Z. TANG, T. XU, Y. SAAD, AND Y. XI
Schulz iteration may also require reconstructing matrix shards through additional
collective communication inside the optimizer step.
In this paper, we study a tiled formulation in which the extent of this spectral
coupling is controlled explicitly by the tile size. Tiling simultaneously reduces the
cost of dense matrix products, localizes the Newton–Schulz computation within shard-
resident submatrices, and exposes more parallel work to the hardware. Full-matrix
Muon represents one extreme, where the Newton–Schulz map is applied to the entire
matrix. Coordinatewise methods represent the opposite extreme, where no matrix-
level spectral interaction is retained. Between these regimes is a family of local matrix-
function updates: the same Newton–Schulz map is applied, but only to submatrices
of a prescribed size. The goal is to retain useful local spectral behavior while reducing
the cost of the optimizer step and exposing more parallel work to the hardware.
We introduce Hierarchical Muon (HiMuon), a tiled Newton–Schulz method based
on this principle. Let Φ Kdenote theK-step Newton–Schulz map used in Muon.
For a tile sizeT, HiMuon partitions a momentum-gradient matrix into anR×C
grid ofT×Ttiles, applies Φ Kindependently to each tile, and reassembles the tile
outputs. For fixed finiteTbelow the matrix dimensions, this construction does not
recover the full-matrix Muon map. It defines a distinct local matrix-function update:
spectral interactions are preserved within each tile and removed across tile boundaries.
The tile size therefore acts as both a numerical parameter, controlling the amount of
retained spectral coupling, and a computational parameter, controlling the cost of the
Newton–Schulz computation. For fixedT≪min{H, W}, the leading Newton–Schulz
work scales as
O(HWTK).
The tiled formulation changes more than the arithmetic count. Once the par-
tition is fixed, all tilewise Newton–Schulz evaluations are independent, so the opti-
mizer step becomes a batched small-matrix linear algebra workload rather than a
sequence of large full-matrix operations. HiMuon exploits this structure through tile-
size-dependent kernels, cross-layer batching, memory-bounded chunking, and runtime
tile-size schedules. The same representation also supports distributed layouts in which
each rank performs its tiled Newton–Schulz work locally. In this sense, the numerical
locality of the update and the GPU execution strategy are designed together.
The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows.
•A tiled Newton–Schulz formulation of Muon.We define HiMuon as a
finite-tile matrix-function update for Muon-type optimization. The formula-
tion makes the degree of spectral coupling explicit through the tile size and
distinguishes the full-matrix Muon update from local tiled alternatives.
•An end-to-end GPU implementation.We develop an implementation
that maps the tiled Newton–Schulz workload to batched small dense matrix
operations, using tile-size-dependent kernels, cross-layer batching, memory-
bounded chunking, and support for distributed parameter layouts.
•Empirical characterization across quality, speed, and precision.We
evaluate HiMuon at the matrix-function, layer, optimizer-step, and end-to-
end training levels. The experiments study real transformer weight shapes,
kernel and tile-shape choices, cross-layer batching, finite-precision Newton–
Schulz computation, and the resulting training-quality trade-off. We also
use an associative-memory benchmark as a structural diagnostic for tile-size
selection.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces notation,
HIMUON3
the polar decomposition, the finite Newton–Schulz iteration, and the baseline Muon
optimizer. Section 3 reviews efficient variants of Muon-type optimization and alter-
native reductions of the Newton–Schulz computation. Section 4 presents the HiMuon
algorithm and its GPU implementation. Section 5 introduces a capacity-based diag-
nostic for the tiled map. Section 6 reports numerical experiments on training quality,
computational efficiency, cross-layer batching, and finite-precision behavior. Section 7
concludes the paper.
2. Preliminaries.This section fixes the notation and the full-matrix Muon up-
date used as the baseline throughout the paper. We first introduce matrix norms and
the tiling operator, then distinguish the exact polar factor from the finite Newton–
Schulz map used by Muon, and finally state the optimizer update that HiMuon mod-
ifies.
2.1. Notation.Matrices are denoted by bold uppercase letters, e.g.,A, andI
denotes an identity matrix of the appropriate dimension. The model parameters are
collected inθ, and the training objective isL(θ). Subscripttdenotes the optimizer
step. ForA∈RH×W, we write∥A∥Fand∥A∥2for the Frobenius and spectral norms.
For a finite tile sizeT, letB Tdenote the tiling operator. GivenA∈RH×W,
define
R=⌈H/T⌉, C=⌈W/T⌉.
The operatorB TpadsAwith zeros, if needed, to an (RT)×(CT) matrix and partitions
the padded matrix into anR×Cgrid ofT×Ttiles:
BT(A) ={A rc}r=1,...,R;c=1,...,C ,A rc∈RT×T.
The inverse operationB−1
Tdenotes reassembly of the tiles followed by removal of
the padding. We reserve the notationT=∞for the no-tiling case, in which the full
matrix is processed as a single object rather than padded to a square tile. Rectangular
tiles (T h, Tw) are used only in the tile-shape study of Figure 8; elsewhereT h=Tw=T.
2.2. Polar Factor and Newton–Schulz Map.We first recall the row-oriented
polar factor. SupposeA∈RH×Whas full row rank andH≤W. Its row polar
decomposition is
(2.1)A=UP,
whereU∈RH×Whas orthonormal rows,UU⊤=I, andP= (A⊤A)1/2is symmetric
positive semidefinite [11, 10]. The factorU= polar(A) is the closest row-orthonormal
matrix toAin any unitarily invariant norm. WhenAis rank deficient, the polar
factor need not be unique. In this paper, polar(A) is used only as an exact reference
matrix function; the optimizer update itself is defined by the finite Newton–Schulz
map below.
Muon uses a quintic Newton–Schulz iteration as a finite polar-factor surrogate.
For a nonzero matrixA∈RH×WwithH≤W, set
X0=A
∥A∥F.
The row-oriented recurrence is
(2.2)X k+1= 
aI+bX kX⊤
k+c(X kX⊤
k)2
Xk,
4Z. TANG, T. XU, Y. SAAD, AND Y. XI
with coefficients
(2.3) (a, b, c) = (3.4445,−4.7750,2.0315),
as in the Muon implementation [15]. HereIhas dimensionH×H. IfH > W, the
same recurrence is applied toA⊤and the result is transposed back, so the Gram
matrix in the iteration always has dimension min{H, W}. For the zero matrix, we set
ΦK(0) =0.
We denote the result afterKNewton–Schulz steps by
(2.4) Φ K(A) :=X K.
The map Φ Kshould not be identified with the exact polar factor. It is a finite
Newton–Schulz map used to construct the optimizer direction. Although it drives
singular values toward a common scale, it is not an exact polar decomposition.
2.3. The Muon Update.We now state the full-matrix Muon update that
HiMuon modifies. LetW t−1∈RH×Wbe a two-dimensional parameter matrix at
optimizer stept, and let
Gt=∇WL(θt−1)
be its gradient. Muon first updates a momentum buffer,
(2.5)M t=βM t−1+G t,
and then forms the Nesterov-type momentum gradient
(2.6) bGt=G t+βM t.
The matrix-valued update direction is obtained by applying the finite Newton–Schulz
map to this momentum gradient:
(2.7)U t= Φ K(bGt).
With learning rateηand decoupled weight-decay coefficientλ, the core parameter
update is
(2.8)W t= (1−ηλ)W t−1−ηU t.
Equations (2.7)–(2.8) define the full-matrix baseline. HiMuon keeps the momentum
and weight-decay structure of Muon, but replaces the single full-matrix application
of Φ Kin (2.7) by tilewise applications of the same finite map.
3. Related Work.This section places HiMuon in context with prior work on
Muon-type optimization and efficient matrix-function updates. We organize the dis-
cussion around five themes: update scaling, structured decompositions of the Newton–
Schulz computation, alternative reductions of the Muon matrix function, batched
GPU execution, and theoretical or diagnostic benchmarks.
3.1. Scaling and normalization in Muon-type optimizers.Muon-type op-
timizers apply a finite Newton–Schulz map to momentum-gradient matrices, but their
practical behavior also depends on how the resulting update is scaled. Liu et al. [21]
identify weight growth and shape-dependent update magnitudes as obstacles to scal-
ing Muon, and address them through decoupled weight decay and a shape-dependent
learning-rate scaler. Other variants modify the normalization before or after the
HIMUON5
Newton–Schulz map. MuonEq [4] equilibrates rows and columns before applying the
map; Muon+ [36] and NorMuon [20] normalize the update after the map; RMNP [7]
replaces the map by row-wise normalization; and TrasMuon [5] adds feature-wise
trust-region clipping. These methods show that Muon-type optimization depends
not only on singular-value homogenization, but also on how update magnitudes are
balanced across rows, neurons, and parameter shapes.
3.2. Structured decompositions of Newton–Schulz updates.A closely
related line of work reduces the cost of Muon by replacing one global Newton–Schulz
update with smaller structured subproblems. GLM-5 [9] applies Muon independently
to each attention-head submatrix, while Group Muon [34] treats the head-group size as
a tunable hyperparameter; Boreiko et al. [3] study row-wise, column-wise, and square
block splitting whose block sizes follow the tensor-parallel degree. MuonBP [16] uses
block orthogonalization together with periodic global correction, while DASH [23]
demonstrates the efficiency of batched block updates in Shampoo-type methods.
TEON [35] takes a different direction by coupling multiple layers through tensorized
orthogonalization. These methods decompose matrix-valued update computations
using units motivated by model semantics, parallel layouts, correction schemes, or
cross-layer tensor structure. HiMuon instead uses fixed two-dimensional intra-matrix
tiles whose size is not determined by the sharding layout, making the tile size both a
numerical parameter and a GPU execution parameter.
3.3. Alternative reductions of the Muon matrix function.Other ap-
proaches reduce Muon cost by changing the matrix being transformed, the polynomial
map, or the matrix-function surrogate. Dion2 [1] orthogonalizes selected rows with er-
ror feedback, while Magma [14] uses stochastic masking based on momentum-gradient
alignment. Turbo-Muon [2] reduces the number of Newton–Schulz steps; PRISM [33]
adapts the polynomial coefficients to the observed spectrum; and IFNSO [13] replaces
the iteration by a learned polynomial operator. MUD [28] uses triangular whitening
instead of Newton–Schulz, and PolarGrad [19] studies orthogonalized updates from
a broader matrix-optimization perspective. This line of work modifies the operator
used to approximate or replace the polar-factor surrogate. HiMuon keeps the finite
Newton–Schulz map itself unchanged, but changes the domain on which it is applied.
3.4. Batched GPU execution.Tiled Newton–Schulz computation exposes
many independent small dense matrix products. This connects HiMuon to batched
small-matrix linear algebra, where grouping independent operations is important for
GPU utilization [22]. Related implementation ideas include epilogue fusion, on-chip
data reuse, and custom Triton kernels [30, 32]. HiMuon uses these ideas inside the
optimizer step through tilewise Newton–Schulz calls, cross-layer batching, memory-
bounded chunking, and runtime tile-size reconfiguration.
3.5. Theory and diagnostic benchmarks.Recent theory has begun to clarify
why Muon-type updates can differ from scalar adaptive methods. Kim and Oh [17]
analyze finite-step Muon convergence; Su [29] studies singular-value homogenization
under curvature models; Du and Su [8] derive an activation-aware Newton-Muon
update; and Wen et al. [31] benchmark matrix-based optimizers across model scales.
The associative-memory benchmark of Kim et al. [18] provides a controlled setting in
which full-matrix Muon and SGD have sharply separated one-step capacity scalings.
We use this benchmark in Section 5 as a diagnostic for whether tilewise Newton–Schulz
updates retain the qualitative signal-amplification behavior of full-matrix Muon.
Taken together, these lines of work motivate the design studied in this paper.
6Z. TANG, T. XU, Y. SAAD, AND Y. XI
Gradient Tiling Per-tile NS Untiling
Fig. 1.The tiled Newton–Schulz mapΦ K,T. The lookahead momentum gradient bGis parti-
tioned intoT×Ttiles. The finite Newton–Schulz mapΦ Kis applied independently to each tile, and
the tile outputs are reassembled intoΦ K,T(bG). Because each tile is processed in isolation, spectral
interactions are retained within tiles but removed across tile boundaries.
HiMuon keeps the finite Newton–Schulz map used by Muon, but applies it to fixed-
size two-dimensional intra-matrix tiles. This choice makes the tile size a numerical
parameter, controlling the amount of retained spectral coupling, and an execution
parameter, producing uniform small dense matrix problems for batched GPU ker-
nels. The resulting optimizer combines local matrix-function updates, runtime tile-size
scheduling, and cross-layer batched execution. The capacity diagnostic in Section 5
is then used to assess how this local replacement affects the qualitative behavior of
full-matrix Muon.
4. The HiMuon Method.We now present HiMuon. Starting from the full-
matrix Muon update in (2.7), HiMuon replaces the single application of Φ Kto a
momentum-gradient matrix by independent applications of the same finite Newton–
Schulz map on fixed-size tiles. The tiled update is then implemented as a batched
small-matrix workload on the GPU.
4.1. Tiled Newton–Schulz Map.Let bG∈RH×Wbe the lookahead momen-
tum gradient defined in (2.6). In full-matrix Muon, the update direction is Φ K(bG),
where Φ Kis the finite Newton–Schulz map defined in Subsection 2.2. For a finite tile
sizeT, HiMuon applies this map locally. Using the tiling operatorB Tfrom Subsec-
tion 2.1, we write
(4.1)B T(bG) =bGrc
r=1,...,R;c=1,...,C, R=⌈H/T⌉, C=⌈W/T⌉,
where zero padding is used when needed and each tile bGrchas sizeT×T. HiMuon
applies the same map Φ Kindependently to each tile and then reassembles the outputs:
(4.2) Φ K,T(bG) :=B−1
T
ΦK(bGrc)
r=1,...,R;c=1,...,C
.
The inverse operator removes any padding introduced during tiling. Figure 1 illus-
trates the construction. The special caseT=∞denotes the full-matrix branch,
(4.3) Φ K,∞(bG) := Φ K(bG).
For finiteTbelow the matrix dimensions, the tiled map is generally different from
the full-matrix Muon map:
(4.4) Φ K,T(bG)̸= Φ K(bG).
HIMUON7
This difference is structural: tiling does not commute with either the exact polar
factor or the finite Newton–Schulz surrogate. It is a local matrix-function map whose
tile size controls the amount of retained spectral coupling. Larger tiles preserve more
of the full-matrix interaction, while smaller tiles reduce the cost and expose more
independent work.
For square tiles, each tile requiresO(T3K) arithmetic, and there are approxi-
matelyHW/T2tiles. Thus, up to lower-order padding effects, the leading Newton–
Schulz work is
(4.5)O(HWTK),
compared with the full-matrix costO(HWmin{H, W}K). The same parameterT
determines both the numerical locality of the update and the size of the dense matrix
problems issued to the GPU.
4.2. Update Scaling.As in Muon, we multiply the Newton–Schulz direction by
a shape-dependent RMS-matching factor before applying the parameter update. For
a fullH×Wmatrix, this factor iscp
max{H, W}, since a semi-orthogonal reference
direction has entrywise RMS 1/p
max{H, W}. In the tiled case, the Newton–Schulz
map acts onT×Tblocks, so the corresponding factor is the single tile-size-dependent
scalar
τ(T) =c√
T.
For the no-tiling branch, we setτ ℓ(∞) =cp
max{H ℓ, Wℓ}forW(ℓ)∈RHℓ×W ℓ. The
scaled update is therefore
(4.6)W(ℓ)
t= (1−ηλ)W(ℓ)
t−1−η τ ℓ(Tt) ΦK,T t(bG(ℓ)
t),
where
τℓ(Tt) =(
cp
max{H ℓ, Wℓ}, T t≥max{H ℓ, Wℓ},
c√Tt, T t<max{H ℓ, Wℓ}.
This scaling is a global scalar for each matrix update; it introduces no tilewise adap-
tation and leaves the learning rate, momentum, and weight decay unchanged from
the Muon baseline.
4.3. Complete Algorithm.Algorithm 4.1 summarizes the HiMuon update.
The indexℓ∈ Eenumerates the two-dimensional parameter matrices to which Muon-
type updates are applied, withW(ℓ)∈RHℓ×W ℓ. The valueT tdenotes the tile size
used at optimizer stept; the special valueT t=∞selects the full-matrix branch.
The branchT t≥max{H ℓ, Wℓ}, for exampleT t=∞, denotes the full-matrix
Muon update. Smaller tile sizes are interpreted through the padding-and-tiling op-
eratorB Tt. For square finite tiles,τ(ℓ)
t=c√Ttis a single scalar shared by all tiles
in the matrix; it introduces no tilewise adaptation. Rectangular tiles useτ(ℓ)
t=
cp
max{T h, Tw}in the tile-shape experiments.
4.4. GPU Implementation.The mathematical definition of HiMuon creates
many independent Newton–Schulz problems, one for each tile. This independence is
useful only if the implementation can execute the tilewise computations without intro-
ducing new overheads that offset the arithmetic reduction. A naive implementation
would allocate a fresh tile tensor and launch many small Newton–Schulz computations
every step, writing intermediate matrices to high-bandwidth memory (HBM) between
theKNewton–Schulz steps. These costs can dominate when the tile size is small.
8Z. TANG, T. XU, Y. SAAD, AND Y. XI
Algorithm 4.1HiMuon
Require:learning rateη, momentumβ, Nesterov flag, weight decayλ, NS stepsK,
tile-size schedule{T t}, scaling constantc
1:InitializeM(ℓ)
0←0for allℓ∈ E
2:fort= 1,2, . . .do
3:Compute gradientsG(ℓ)
t← ∇W(ℓ)L(θt−1) for allℓ∈ E
4:foreachℓ∈ Edo
5:M(ℓ)
t←βM(ℓ)
t−1+G(ℓ)
t
6:ifNesterovthen
7: bG(ℓ)
t←G(ℓ)
t+βM(ℓ)
t
8:else
9: bG(ℓ)
t←M(ℓ)
t
10:end if
11:ifT t≥max{H ℓ, Wℓ}then
12:U(ℓ)
t←Φ K(bG(ℓ)
t)
13:τ(ℓ)
t←cp
max{H ℓ, Wℓ}
14:else
15:{ bG(ℓ)
t,rc}r,c← B Tt(bG(ℓ)
t){tile}
16:{U(ℓ)
t,rc}r,c← {Φ K(bG(ℓ)
t,rc)}r,c {tilewise NS}
17:U(ℓ)
t← B−1
Tt 
{U(ℓ)
t,rc}r,c
{untile}
18:τ(ℓ)
t←c√Tt
19:end if
20:W(ℓ)
t←(1−ηλ)W(ℓ)
t−1−η τ(ℓ)
tU(ℓ)
t
21:end for
22:end for
The implementation contribution is therefore an optimizer-level execution plan
for the tiled Newton–Schulz map. The plan has three goals: avoid unnecessary data
movement, aggregate small independent tile computations into large GPU batches,
and allow the tile size to change during training without resetting optimizer state.
These choices do not change the mathematical update in Algorithm 4.1; they deter-
mine how the independent evaluations of Φ Kare scheduled on the GPU.
4.4.1. Tile-size-dependent Newton–Schulz kernels.The best kernel strat-
egy depends on the tile size. For larger tiles, each Newton–Schulz step contains enough
arithmetic to amortize kernel launches, and HiMuon uses a multi-kernel Triton [30]
path. In this path, matrix products and the polynomial update in the Newton–Schulz
recurrence are fused where possible before intermediate results are written back to
HBM.
For smaller tiles, the arithmetic per tile is lower and repeated memory traffic
becomes the main bottleneck. In this regime, the tile working set fits in on-chip static
random-access memory (SRAM). HiMuon therefore uses an SRAM-resident kernel
that keeps allKNewton–Schulz iterations inside a single kernel, avoiding intermediate
HBM round trips through the iteration loop. The threshold between the two paths
is hardware dependent; in our implementation, the SRAM-resident path is used for
tiles up toT= 128.
Figure 2 summarizes this tile-size-dependent dispatch rule. These kernel choices
do not change the arithmetic complexityO(HWTK); their purpose is to make the
HIMUON9
reduced arithmetic cost visible in wall-clock time by reducing memory traffic and
kernel-launch overhead.
Fig. 2.Tile-size-dependent kernel strategy. Larger tiles use a multi-kernel path with epilogue
fusion. Smaller tiles use an SRAM-resident path in which allKNewton–Schulz iterations are kept
on chip, avoiding intermediate HBM round trips.
4.4.2. Cross-layer batching.Tilewise Newton–Schulz evaluations are inde-
pendent not only within a single matrix, but also across different parameter ma-
trices. This is important in transformer models, where each layer contains several
Muon-eligible matrices and each matrix may contain only a moderate number of tiles.
Launching one Newton–Schulz computation per matrix can underutilize the GPU
because each launch may expose too little work.
HiMuon thus groups compatible tiles across layers into larger batched Newton–
Schulz calls. Tiles are compatible when they have the same tile shape, dtype, and
kernel path. The batched call computes the same tilewise outputs as processing each
matrix separately; only the execution order changes. Momentum buffers, parameter
tensors, and weight decay remain indexed by the original parameterℓ, so cross-layer
batching is an implementation strategy rather than a change to the optimizer update.
For large models, a single global batch of all compatible tiles may exceed the
available memory budget. HiMuon handles this with memory-bounded chunking: the
batched tile set is split into the fewest chunks whose input, intermediate workspace,
and output fit within a prescribed memory budget. Since the Newton–Schulz evalua-
tions are independent across tiles, chunking is mathematically equivalent to processing
the full batch at once. It only bounds temporary memory usage.
In single-GPU and Distributed Data Parallel (DDP) runs, the batched tiles are
assembled during each optimizer step into reusable batched buffers whose storage is
cached across steps. Under the bank-sharded Fully Sharded Data Parallel (FSDP)
layout used in our experiments, same-shape matrices are stored along a leading batch
axis, so each rank owns a subset of complete matrices in its local shard. The tiled
Newton–Schulz computation is therefore rank-local and does not require an optimizer-
internal all-gather.
4.4.3. Runtime tile-size reconfiguration.The tile size is exposed as a run-
time parameter rather than being fixed at optimizer construction. Areconfigure()
routine updates the tile-dependent execution plan whenT tchanges. This plan includes
tile indexing metadata, batching buckets, chunking decisions, kernel-path selection,
and graph-capture state when applicable. The optimizer state itself, including the
10Z. TANG, T. XU, Y. SAAD, AND Y. XI
momentum buffers, is independent of the tile size and is preserved across reconfigu-
ration.
We treatT t=∞as the full-matrix branch, in which Φ Kis applied to the
original matrix. Finite tile sizes are interpreted through the padded tiling opera-
torB Tt, where zero padding only aligns the matrix boundaries with the tile grid:
padded rows and columns remain identically zero throughout the iteration (2.2) and
do not affect the Frobenius normalization of the tile. Tiling is therefore meaningful
only whenT t<max{H ℓ, Wℓ}. WhenT t≥max{H ℓ, Wℓ}, the partition reduces to
a single tile (R=C= 1) and the tiled map coincides with the full-matrix map,
ΦK,T t(bG(ℓ)
t) = Φ K(bG(ℓ)
t); this case is therefore identified with the full-matrix branch,
including its scaling factorcp
max{H ℓ, Wℓ}.
In the end-to-end experiments of Subsection 6.2, we use a full-to-local schedule,
Tt=

∞, t < t 1,
512, t 1≤t < t 2,
128, t≥t 2.
The initial full-matrix phase preserves global spectral coupling during the earliest
optimization steps, when gradient statistics and dominant directions are least settled.
The optimizer then switches to lower-cost tiled maps for the remainder of training.
The DDP experiments use (t 1, t2) = (100,500), while the FSDP experiment uses
(t1, t2) = (200,500). These breakpoints are fixed empirical choices in our experiments.
The capacity diagnostic in Section 5 motivates the full-to-local form of the schedule
qualitatively, but does not determine the switch times.
5. Capacity Diagnostic.Many-step transformer training entangles the effect
of the update map with learning-rate schedules, changing gradient statistics, stochas-
ticity, and architecture-specific dynamics. To isolate the effect of replacing a full-
matrix Newton–Schulz map by a tiled one, we use the one-step linear associative-
memory benchmark of Kim et al. [18]. This benchmark is useful because full-matrix
Muon and SGD have sharply separated capacity scalings, so the signal-amplification
behavior of matrix-function updates can be observed directly. We use the benchmark
as an empirical diagnostic for how the tiled map Φ K,Tchanges this behavior as the
tile size varies.
5.1. Linear Associative-Memory Benchmark.We first recall the bench-
mark. The task consists ofNkey–value pairs (v i, ui), where
vi, ui∼ N(0, d−1Id).
The associations are stored in a matrixW∈Rd×d. Given an input keyv i, the model
assigns logits
u⊤
jWvi, j= 1, . . . , N,
and is trained with cross-entropy loss to predict the matching value indexi. Theith
training example is sampled with probabilityp i∝i−α. Starting fromW 0= 0, one
optimizer update using a minibatch of sizeBproducesW 1. An itemkis counted as
recovered if
arg max
ju⊤
jW1vk=k.
The one-step storage capacity is the number of recovered items.
HIMUON11
The benchmark separates scalar gradient updates from spectral matrix-function
updates through their capacity scalings. Under the assumptions of Kim et al. [18],
withα >1 and appropriate scaling of the stabilized polar map, the full-matrix Muon
update has one-step capacity
(5.1) eΘ
min{d1+1/(2α), B1/α}
,
whereBis the minibatch size. Under the same data model, SGD has capacity
(5.2) eΘ
min{d1/(2α), B1/α}
.
Thus, in the dimension-limited regime, the Muon capacity term is larger than the
SGD term by a factor ofd. The shared termB1/αis a finite-sample ceiling: items
absent from the minibatch provide no direct training signal in the one-step gradient.
A useful interpretation of (5.1) is bulk singular-value amplification. At initializa-
tion, the one-step gradient contains strong directions associated with high-frequency
sampled items and a bulk of weaker directions associated with lower-frequency items.
A stabilized polar-type update amplifies this bulk more uniformly than a scalar gradi-
ent update, enabling recovery of weaker associations. Since HiMuon applies the finite
Newton–Schulz map only within tiles, the experiments below test how much of this
full-matrix amplification behavior remains after tilewise processing and reassembly.
5.2. Tile-Size Capacity Diagnostic.The capacity scalings in (5.1) and (5.2)
are stated for global update maps. HiMuon replaces the full map Φ K(·) by the
tiled map Φ K,T(·). Each tile can amplify only the singular directions present in
its own submatrix, while singular directions whose support spans several tiles are
not treated coherently by a single Newton–Schulz map. This suggests a tile-size
heuristic: larger tiles should better preserve full-matrix behavior because each tile
contains a richer local spectrum, whereas smaller tiles reduce cost but may weaken
the reassembled signal amplification. We therefore evaluate two one-step diagnostics:
aggregate capacity scaling with dimension and top-krecovery over the sampled item
support.
Figure 3 reports one-step capacity for SGD, full-matrix Muon, and HiMuon with
T∈ {128,256,512}acrossα∈ {1.25,1.5,1.75}, all within theα >1 regime of (5.1).
We used∈ {256,512,1024},B/d= 10,N= 105, and three random seeds. Across
the tested values of (d, α), the same qualitative ordering is observed:
Muon≈HiMuon-512>HiMuon-256>HiMuon-128≫SGD.
Atd= 1024, HiMuon-512 is within 3% of full-matrix Muon across all three values of
α, and HiMuon-256 is within 6%. HiMuon-128 trails full-matrix Muon by 11%–39%,
but remains well above SGD in every panel. The Muon/SGD gap also grows withd,
consistent with the dimension-dependent separation predicted by (5.1) and (5.2).
Figure 4 examines which sampled items are recovered atd= 1024,α= 1.5,
andB/d= 10. We restrict this evaluation to the unique sampled supportSin the
minibatch. This avoids mixing update-map quality with finite-sample coverage, since
items outsideSdo not contribute directly to the one-step gradient. Across seeds,|S|
averages 639. We sort sampled items by decreasing population frequency and report
top-krecovery up to the common cutoffk max= 632.
The head of the sampled distribution is insensitive to tile size. Throughk≈128,
full-matrix Muon and all HiMuon variants recover nearly all sampled top-kitems,
12Z. TANG, T. XU, Y. SAAD, AND Y. XI
Fig. 3.One-step capacity on the associative-memory benchmark atα∈ {1.25,1.5,1.75},B/d=
10,N= 105, one update fromW 0= 0, and three random seeds. Bars are grouped by dimensiond,
and error bars show seed standard deviation. HiMuon approaches full-matrix Muon asTgrows; all
Newton–Schulz-based updates remain well above SGD, and the Muon/SGD gap widens withd.
whereas SGD drops much earlier. Tile size matters more deeper in the sampled
support, where recovery depends on amplifying weaker directions. Atk=k max,
HiMuon-128 trails full-matrix Muon by about 20 percentage points, HiMuon-256 by
about 5 percentage points, and HiMuon-512 by about 1 percentage point. This rank-
dependent pattern supports the interpretation that high-frequency sampled items are
robust to tiling, while recovery of weaker sampled items depends more strongly on
the amount of retained spectral coupling.
Fig. 4.One-step top-krecovery atd= 1024,α= 1.5, andB/d= 10. All methods use the same
embeddings, minibatch, and initial gradient; only the update map differs. Recovery is computed over
the unique sampled supportS, sorted by decreasing item frequency.Left: top-krecovery rate.Right:
gap to full-matrix Muon in percentage points. Tile-size differences are small for high-frequency items
and increase deeper in the sampled support.
These diagnostics suggest that the importance of tile size depends on which ca-
pacity limit is active. If the finite-sample termB1/αis the bottleneck, recovery is
limited mainly by minibatch coverage, and smaller tiles may be sufficient. If the
dimension-dependent Muon term in (5.1) is the bottleneck, the update map matters
more, and larger tiles are needed to better preserve full-matrix spectral behavior. In
our experiments,T= 512 is closest to full-matrix Muon,T= 256 retains much of the
gain at lower cost, andT= 128 shows visible capacity loss.
The diagnostic also gives a qualitative rationale for the runtime tile-size schedule
in Subsection 4.4.3. Because the benchmark isolates a one-step update fromW 0= 0,
it is most analogous to the earliest stage of training, where global spectral coupling is
HIMUON13
most directly exposed. This motivates using a full-matrix warm start before switching
to finite tiles, and using larger tiles before smaller ones in a full-to-local schedule. The
benchmark does not determine the switch times or the final tile size; those choices are
fixed empirical hyperparameters in the end-to-end experiments.
6. Numerical Experiments.We evaluate HiMuon along four axes: end-to-end
training behavior, matrix-function runtime on transformer layer shapes, optimizer-
step speed under cross-layer batching, and robustness to low-precision Newton–Schulz
computation. Unless otherwise stated, the baseline is full-matrix Muon [21], and
HiMuon uses the same learning rate as the corresponding Muon run. This isolates
the effect of replacing the full-matrix Newton–Schulz map by the tiled map.
6.1. Experimental Setup. Models and data.End-to-end training exper-
iments use Qwen3-0.6B, Qwen3-1.7B, and Qwen3-4B transformer language mod-
els [25]. The two smaller models are trained with Distributed Data Parallel (DDP),
while the 4B model is trained with Fully Sharded Data Parallel (FSDP). Layer-level
performance studies use the same model family to probe the larger-matrix regime.
Training uses the FineWeb dataset [24] in streaming mode with sequence length
1024, drawing from its officialsample-10BTsubset (∼10B tokens). Held-out eval-
uation uses FineWeb’sCC-MAIN-2024-51configuration, a Common Crawl snapshot
disjoint from the training sample.
Optimizer settings.Unless otherwise stated, HiMuon uses momentumβ= 0.95
andK= 5 Newton–Schulz steps, following the default setting of Muon [21], with the
update scaling of Subsection 4.2 andc= 0.2. The end-to-end runs use the runtime
tile-size schedule described in Subsection 4.4.3: an initial full-matrix phase, followed
byT= 512, thenT= 128. The DDP runs switch at steps 100 and 500, while
the FSDP run switches at steps 200 and 500. Isolated matrix-function, kernel, and
optimizer-step studies use a fixed tile size, stated with each experiment.
The learning rate is selected by grid search for full-matrix Muon, and HiMuon
reuses the same value. The DDP runs use a cosine learning-rate schedule with a 100-
step linear warmup, decaying to zero. The FSDP run uses a warmup-stable-decay
(WSD) schedule with the same 100-step warmup and a final 400-step decay to 0.1×
the peak learning rate.
Hardware and timing protocol.End-to-end training runs use 4×NVIDIA A40
GPUs: Qwen3-0.6B and Qwen3-1.7B in DDP, and Qwen3-4B in FSDP. Matrix-
function, kernel, and optimizer-step performance studies run on a single NVIDIA
A40 GPU unless otherwise stated. Latencies are measured with CUDA events after
a warmup phase, and we report medians with interquartile ranges over 30–50 timed
repetitions. Layer-level speedups are measured in paired trials: the baseline and test
configuration are run back-to-back, and the per-trial ratio is taken. Aggregate step-
time and kernel speedups are reported as ratios of the corresponding medians. Peak
memory is the maximum allocated memory (torch.cuda.max memory allocated)
recorded over a short run of optimizer steps after warmup. All experiments use Py-
Torch 2.6.0 with CUDA 12.4; for details, please refer to our code repository.
Numerical precision.All training and performance experiments use bf16 mixed-
precision computation, matching the default Muon implementation. The precision
studies in Subsections 6.5 and 6.6 vary the precision used inside the Newton–Schulz
inner GEMMs as described there.
Code availability.The implementation and the scripts for all experiments in this
section are available at https://github.com/tang0389/himuon.
14Z. TANG, T. XU, Y. SAAD, AND Y. XI
6.2. Training Quality.We first evaluate the effect of the tiled update on end-
to-end pretraining. HiMuon replaces one global Newton–Schulz map by many local
maps, so the goal is to test whether the wall-clock reduction is accompanied by a
visible loss penalty in short training runs. We report next-token cross-entropy on
both the training stream and a held-out validation split disjoint from the training
data.
Each model is trained for 1000 steps on the FineWeb sample-10BT, comparing
HiMuon against full-matrix Muon at the same learning rate and a single fixed seed.
Qwen3-0.6B and Qwen3-1.7B run in 4×A40 DDP with an effective batch of 64 length-
1024 sequences (31.3M non-padding tokens), usingη= 0.02 andη= 0.01, respectively.
Qwen3-4B runs in 4×A40 FSDP with an effective batch of 32 length-512 sequences
andη= 0.005. The HiMuon schedule starts with the full-matrix branch, so HiMuon
and Muon share the same update early in training and differ only after the tile-size
switches.
Table 1 reports the training loss at selected steps, smoothed by a trailing mean
over the preceding 50 steps to reduce minibatch noise. Across checkpoints, the
HiMuon–Muon differences are small relative to the loss scale; the tiled run is some-
times lower and sometimes higher.
Table 1
Training loss, reported as a trailing mean over the preceding50steps, for Muon and HiMuon.
Values are comparable within each model but not across models. The0.6B and1.7B models use
DDP; the4B model uses FSDP.
Step
Model Optimizer 100 200 300 500 700 1000
0.6BMuon 3.220 2.913 2.744 2.521 2.338 2.236
HiMuon 3.183 2.901 2.723 2.493 2.281 2.162
1.7BMuon 3.169 2.909 2.746 2.507 2.305 2.189
HiMuon 3.162 2.914 2.736 2.495 2.277 2.142
4BMuon 4.838 4.590 4.082 3.701 3.698 3.719
HiMuon 4.836 4.583 4.103 3.721 3.717 3.733
DDP.Figure 5 plots validation loss against tokens processed and per-step wall time
for the two DDP models. HiMuon tracks full-matrix Muon through the initial full-
matrix phase and then settles to a lower step time after the tile-size switches. In these
single-seed runs, the validation losses remain close to, and in these cases below, the
corresponding Muon curves.
For Qwen3-0.6B, the step time decreases from 3.80 s in the full-matrix phase
to 3.70 s after the first switch and 3.62 s after the second switch, a 4.7% per-step
reduction. Total wall time changes from 3959 s to 3822 s, a 3.5% reduction. The final
training loss is lower for HiMuon by ∆ =−0.074 at step 1000, and the final validation
loss is 2.391 versus 2.496 for Muon.
For Qwen3-1.7B, the larger matrices make the tiled Newton–Schulz computation
more beneficial. Step time decreases from 6.72 s to 6.36 s and then 6.16 s, an 8.3%
per-step reduction. Total wall time changes from 7157 s to 6610 s, a 7.6% reduction.
The final training-loss difference is ∆ =−0.047, and the final validation loss is 2.152
for HiMuon versus 2.226 for Muon. The brief upward spikes in step time coincide
with tile-size switches, where the kernels and cross-layer batching plan are rebuilt;
this overhead is amortized over subsequent steps.
HIMUON15
Fig. 5.End-to-end DDP training of Qwen3-0.6B and Qwen3-1.7B with HiMuon and full-matrix
Muon on4×A40 (1000steps,31.3M non-padding tokens;η= 0.02andη= 0.01).(a)Held-out
validation loss against tokens processed.(b)Per-step wall time, with the tile-size switches marked
at step100(T= 512) and step500(T= 128). HiMuon settles to a lower steady-state step time
after each switch; upward spikes at the switches reflect rebuilding kernels and batching metadata.
FSDP.The Qwen3-4B model is too large for the DDP setup on 4×A40 and is therefore
run under FSDP. Because the Muon baseline in this setting is an FSDP adaptation
rather than the implementation used in the DDP runs, we treat the 4B experiment as
a quality and scaling check rather than a direct timed comparison. HiMuon’s training
loss stays within a few hundredths of full-matrix Muon in Table 1; the final validation
losses are 3.629 for HiMuon and 3.613 for Muon. HiMuon’s step time decreases as the
schedule shrinks the tiles, from 17.55 s to 17.32 s and then 17.18 s after the switches at
steps 200 and 500. End-to-end throughput tuning under FSDP is left to future work.
Overall, the tiled update gives lower wall-clock time in the DDP runs while keeping
training and validation losses close to full-matrix Muon in these single-seed experi-
ments. The reported wall-clock reductions should be interpreted as short-run mea-
surements: in these 1000-step runs, the initial full-matrix phase and schedule-switch
overheads form a larger fraction of total time than they would in longer pretraining
runs.
6.3. Matrix-Function Performance.We next study the tiled Newton–Schulz
map in isolation, separated from the full training loop. This isolates the matrix-
function computation from the forward pass, backward pass, communication, and data
movement that also contribute to end-to-end training time. The experiments in this
subsection measure speedup on real Qwen3 layer shapes, compare kernel strategies,
and examine the speed–quality trade-off across tile shapes.
Speedup on real transformer layer shapes.We first measure the isolated
tiled/full-matrix Newton–Schulz speedup on actual Qwen3 weight matrices. For each
Qwen3 model, we extract the seven Muon-eligible matrices from Block 0:q proj,
kproj,v proj,o proj,gate proj,up proj, anddown proj; their shapes are listed
in Table 2. For each shape, we apply the full-matrix map Φ Kand the tiled map Φ K,T
withT= 512 andK= 5 to a single random bf16 Gaussian matrix of that shape. We
report the paired speedupt full/ttileas the median over 30 timed repetitions after 3
warmup iterations.
16Z. TANG, T. XU, Y. SAAD, AND Y. XI
Fig. 6.Per-layer tiled/full-matrix Newton–Schulz speedup on real Qwen3 weight shapes from
Block 0 withT= 512. Speedups reach up to2.9×on large attention and MLP projection matrices
in Qwen3-1.7B and Qwen3-4B. Thek projandv projmatrices have smaller output dimensions
under grouped-query attention and therefore show smaller gains.
Table 2
Shapes (output×input) of the seven Muon-eligible weight matrices per transformer block of
each Qwen3 model [25], as used in Figure6.
Modelq proj k proj v proj o proj gate proj up proj down proj
0.6B 2048×1024 1024×1024 1024×1024 1024×2048 3072×1024 3072×1024 1024×3072
1.7B 2048×2048 1024×2048 1024×2048 2048×2048 6144×2048 6144×2048 2048×6144
4B 4096×2560 1024×2560 1024×2560 2560×4096 9728×2560 9728×2560 2560×9728
Figure 6 shows that the measured per-layer speedups atT= 512 range from
1.4–1.6×for Qwen3-0.6B, 1.4–2.9×for Qwen3-1.7B, and 1.3–2.9×for Qwen3-4B.
The largest gains occur on the attention projectionsq projando projand on the
wide MLP projectionsgate proj,up proj, anddown proj. In contrast,k projand
vprojshow smaller gains. Qwen3 uses grouped-query attention, which reduces the
output dimension of these two projections relative to the hidden size; the full-matrix
Newton–Schulz work on these narrower matrices is already smaller, so tiling has less
work to reduce. Across the remaining projections, the measurements show that the
O(HWTK) cost model translates into practical speedups on real transformer weight
matrices, with larger gains whenHandWare large relative toT.
Kernel strategy.The tiled map changes the performance regime of Newton–Schulz.
At small tile sizes, the arithmetic work per tile is low, and repeated memory traffic
can dominate. Without fusion, each Newton–Schulz iteration writes intermediate
matrices to HBM and reads them back. Small tiles are also the regime in which the
fullK-step computation can fit in on-chip SRAM, enabling a single SRAM-resident
kernel.
We study this regime atT= 128, comparing four implementations: a PyTorch
eager loop,torch.compile, a three-kernel Triton implementation with epilogue fu-
sion, and an SRAM-resident kernel that keeps allK= 5 Newton–Schulz iterations on
chip. Each implementation processes a batch of random bf16 GaussianT×Ttiles.
We sweep the tile batch sizeB tileand report the median over 50 timed repetitions
after 10 warmup iterations, with speedup measured relative to the eager loop.
Figure 7 shows that the SRAM-resident path gives the largest improvement for
T= 128, achieving roughly 4–8×speedup over eager execution, with the largest
gain atB tile= 2048. The three-kernel epilogue-fusion path is useful only at larger
batch sizes, where its launch overhead is amortized.torch.compilegives a smaller
but consistent improvement, reflecting partial reduction of launch overhead without
fusing the full Newton–Schulz iteration loop.
HIMUON17
Fig. 7.Kernel strategy comparison atT= 128on the NVIDIA A40 GPU, sweeping tile batch
sizeB tile∈ {32,128,512,2048}.(a)Absolute wall-clock time, shown on a log scale.(b)Speedup
relative to the PyTorch eager implementation. The SRAM-resident kernel removes intermediate
HBM traffic within the fused NS inner loop and obtains roughly4–8×speedup over eager execution
across the swept batch sizes.
Tile shape.The tile shape affects both execution and optimization behavior because
it defines the local matrix to which Φ Kis applied. We compare rectangular tile shapes
using two measurements: isolated kernel speed and final training loss for Llama-220M,
a small non-Qwen model for inexpensive tile-shape sweeping, trained with HiMuon
for 300 steps.
For the kernel-speed panel of Figure 8, we sweep tile shapes (T h, Tw) drawn from
{16,32,64,128,256,512,1024,2048}, keeping only shapes that fit the A40 SRAM bud-
get. The tile batch size is chosen so that the working setB tileThTwis constant across
shapes. The reported speedup is the fused NS5 kernel over the three-kernel path.
For the training-quality panel, we train Llama-220M on FineWeb sample-10BT for
300 steps at batch size 8, sequence length 1024, andη= 0.02, using a 20-step linear
warmup followed by a 60-step cosine decay to a 0.1 learning-rate floor. The experi-
ment uses a single fixed seed and replays the same preloaded batch sequence for every
tile shape; the reported loss is the mean over the final 100 steps.
Figure 8 shows that kernel speed alone is not sufficient to select a tile shape.
Smaller or more rectangular tiles can improve isolated kernel speed, but may worsen
training loss in this diagnostic. In the tested setting, square tiles give a more favorable
quality–speed trade-off than highly rectangular tiles. We therefore use squareT= 512
tiles as the default on A40.
6.4. Cross-Layer Batching.We next evaluate the cross-layer batching strat-
egy described in Subsection 4.4.2. This experiment separates the gain from tiling itself
from the additional gain obtained by aggregating many independent tile computations
into larger GPU launches.
In Qwen3-1.7B, there are 28 transformer blocks and 7 Muon-eligible matrices per
block, giving 196 independent per-layer Newton–Schulz calls in an unbatched imple-
mentation. WithT= 512, each individual matrix contains only a modest number
of tiles, so launching one Newton–Schulz call per matrix can underutilize the GPU.
Cross-layer batching groups compatible tiles across layers and processes them in a
small number of larger batched calls.
Tiles of the same shape and dtype are grouped across layers and concatenated
into a batched buffer. When the buffer exceeds the memory budget, it is split into the
18Z. TANG, T. XU, Y. SAAD, AND Y. XI
Fig. 8.Speed and quality across tile shapes.(a)Single-call speedup of the fused NS5 kernel
over the three-kernel path across shapes admissible under the A40 SRAM budget; the black outline
marks the fused-dispatch region(T hTw≤16 384).(b)Final training loss, averaged over the last100
of300steps, for Llama-220M trained with HiMuon across tile shapes and kernel strategies. The
dotted line marks the(512,512)reference. Shapes that are fastest in the isolated kernel are not
necessarily best for training quality.
fewest chunks that fit, with intermediate workspace reused across steps. AtT= 512,
the 1680 tiles of Qwen3-0.6B fit in a single call, whereas the 5376 tiles of Qwen3-1.7B
are processed in two chunks of 2688. In this benchmark, every optimizer is run on the
same synthetic workload: 8 stacked bias-freeLinear(H,H)layers in bf16, fed fresh
random Gaussian gradients at each step. HiMuon usesT= 512 andK= 5. Per-step
time is the median over 50 steps after 20 warmup steps, and peak memory is the
maximum allocated over a short run. The cross-layer variant additionally captures
the batched Newton–Schulz workspace in a CUDA graph, which pools and reuses that
workspace across steps.
Fig. 9.Optimizer-step performance on the NVIDIA A40 GPU. The workload consists of8
stackedLinear(H,H)layers in bfloat16, withH∈ {1024,2048,4096}.(a)Per-step speedup relative
to full-matrix Muon. Tiled HiMuon reaches1.4×/3.2×/5.2×atH= 1024/2048/4096; cross-layer
batching raises the total speedup to2.3×/3.7×/5.4×.(b)Peak GPU memory. Tiled HiMuon adds
about+3%over Muon at allH; cross-layer batching adds about+22%to+25%due to the batched
buffer, with the overhead bounded by chunking and workspace reuse.
Figure 9 shows that the tiled map provides the dominant optimizer-step speedup.
Cross-layer batching gives an additional wall-clock reduction by replacing many small
Newton–Schulz calls with fewer larger batched calls. The incremental benefit is largest
HIMUON19
atH= 1024, where the plain tiled calls are small; it shrinks atH= 4096, where each
call is already large enough to better utilize the GPU. The batching buffer increases
peak memory, but the overhead is controlled by chunking and workspace reuse and
does not grow with the number of training steps.
6.5. Capacity Robustness to Low Precision.Low-precision arithmetic in
the Newton–Schulz inner GEMM is attractive on modern accelerators, but it per-
turbs the matrix-function update through rounding error [12]. We assess whether
this perturbation changes the optimizer’s behavior on a controlled downstream met-
ric. Using the one-step associative-memory benchmark of Section 5, we hold the
problem instance and gradient fixed within each seed and vary only the GEMM pre-
cision used inside the Newton–Schulz iteration. Thus differences in recovered items
reflect finite-precision arithmetic in the map rather than a different problem instance
or tuned learning rate.
The setup usesd= 1024,N= 4096 keys, Zipf exponentα= 1.5, batch-to-
dimension ratioB/d= 10,K= 5 Newton–Schulz iterations, and five random seeds,
executed on a single NVIDIA L40S. For each seed, the key–value pairs (v i, ui)∼
N(0, d−1Id) and the resulting minibatch gradientG 0are constructed in fp64 and
held fixed across precision variants. The four precision settings are an fp64 reference,
fp32, bf16, and fp8e4m3 with per-tensor scaling. The learning rateη= 1.0 is chosen
once from the fp64 reference run and reused for every precision. We compare full-
matrix Muon and HiMuon withT∈ {128,256,512}.
Table 3
One-step recovered items on the associative-memory benchmark of Section5atd= 1024,
N= 4096,α= 1.5,B/d= 10,K= 5, five random seeds, NVIDIA L40S. Recovered-
item entries are mean±seed standard deviation. The last two columns give the operator gap
δF=∥W(·)
1−Wfp64
1∥F/∥Wfp64
1∥F, averaged over seeds, between the produced one-step update and
the fp64 reference of the same update rule. Problem embeddings, minibatch indices, and gradientG 0
are shared across precision columns within each seed; only the GEMM precision inside the Newton–
Schulz iteration differs.
Recovered items Op. gapδ Fto fp64
Method fp64 fp32 bf16 fp8e4m3 bf16 fp8e4m3
Muon 517.8±11.3 517.8±11.3 517.4±11.7 517.2±11.4 0.062 0.019
HiMuon-512 508.8±12.1 508.8±12.1 508.2±11.8 509.0±11.9 0.061 0.027
HiMuon-256 486.4±12.6 486.4±12.6 486.4±11.2 485.8±12.6 0.058 0.039
HiMuon-128 408.0±15.3 408.0±15.3 406.6±15.6 406.8±14.6 0.052 0.059
Table 3 shows that, for every update rule, the recovered item counts agree across
precision settings to well within the seed-to-seed standard deviation. fp32 reproduces
the fp64 means exactly under this setup. bf16 and fp8e4m3 produce operator-level
gaps of roughly 2%–6% relative to the per-method fp64 reference, yet change the mean
recovered count by at most about one item out of roughly 400–520 recovered items.
This is much smaller than the seed-to-seed standard deviation of roughly 11–16 items.
Thus, in this diagnostic, using bf16 or fp8e4m3 for the Newton–Schulz inner GEMMs
does not measurably change the downstream recovery metric.
6.6. Alignment and Descent Potential under Low Precision.The recov-
ery test in Subsection 6.5 examines one downstream metric. We also evaluate two local
quantities associated with per-step progress of Muon-type updates: the alignmentγ
of the update with the true gradient and the descent potentialϕalong the update
direction, as studied by Shumaylov et al. [27]. This experiment asks whether tile size
20Z. TANG, T. XU, Y. SAAD, AND Y. XI
and low-precision Newton–Schulz arithmetic change these quantities on a controlled
quadratic proxy.
We write⟨A,B⟩ F= tr(A⊤B) for the Frobenius inner product. Given a full-batch
gradientG, a minibatch gradient eG, an update directionD, and Hessian actionH[D],
define
γ=⟨G,D⟩ F
⟨eG,D⟩ F, ϕ=⟨eG,D⟩2
F
⟨D,H[D]⟩ F.
Larger values correspond to faster local progress under an appropriately tuned step
size. We evaluate these quantities on a teacher–student quadratic least-squares proxy
after Davis and Drusvyatskiy [6]:
f(W) =1
2Ex∼N(0,Σ) ∥(W−W⋆)x∥2.
The anisotropic covarianceΣand teacherW⋆yield the full gradient, minibatch gra-
dient, and Hessian action in closed form.
Protocol.We used= 1024, spectrumλ i∝i−αwithα= 1 and unit mean, a random
orthogonal eigenbasis, minibatch sizeB= 256, and one seed. The teacherW⋆and
initial iterate are random unit-Frobenius matrices. A single fp32 full-matrix Muon
trajectory of 40 steps (η= 0.03, unit-Frobenius-normalized update) generates the
iterates. At each step, every tile-size and precision variant sees the same minibatch
gradient eG. The evaluated update isD= Φ K,T(eG) forT∈ {128,256,512}, or the
full map Φ K(eG) on the full 1024×1024 matrix, withK= 5. The map is evaluated
in fp32, bf16, and fp8e4m3 with per-tile dynamic scaling on an NVIDIA L40S.
Fig. 10.Update alignmentγ(left)and descent potentialϕ(right)along a40-step fp32 full-
matrix Muon trajectory on a teacher–student quadratic proxy after Davis and Drusvyatskiy [6]. The
setup usesd= 1024,α= 1,B= 256,K= 5, one seed, and an NVIDIA L40S. Line color encodes
the Newton–Schulz operator, fromT= 128toT= 512and the full1024×1024map. Precision is
overlaid as bf16 circles and fp8 crosses on the fp32 line, sampled every fourth step.
Figure 10 shows that bothγandϕdecline along the trajectory as the iterate
approaches the teacher. The precision variants are visually indistinguishable at the
plotted resolution: bf16 and fp8 markers lie on the corresponding fp32 curves for
each tile size. Tile size has a more visible effect. The alignment curves remain close
across tile sizes, while the descent-potential curves follow the ordering full>512>
256>128, with the largest gap early in the trajectory. This matches the qualitative
ordering seen in the capacity diagnostic of Subsection 5.2. These results suggest that,
HIMUON21
in this controlled proxy, tile size changes the local update geometry more than the
tested Newton–Schulz GEMM precisions.
7. Conclusion.In this paper, we introduced HiMuon, a tiled Newton–Schulz
update for Muon-type optimization. HiMuon replaces one full-matrix Newton–Schulz
map by independent applications of the same finite map on fixed-size intra-matrix
tiles. This defines a local matrix-function update whose tile size controls the trade-off
between retained spectral coupling and computational cost. For fixedT, the leading
Newton–Schulz work scales asO(HWTK) rather thanO(HWmin{H, W}K).
The experiments characterize this trade-off at several levels. Capacity diagnostics
show that larger tiles more closely preserve the behavior of full-matrix Muon, while
smaller tiles reduce cost. GPU experiments show that the tiled formulation can be
implemented efficiently through tile-size-dependent kernels, cross-layer batching, and
memory-bounded chunking. End-to-end Qwen3 training experiments indicate that
HiMuon reduces optimizer-step and wall-clock time while maintaining training and
validation losses close to full-matrix Muon in the tested single-seed runs.
Future work includes a theory of the tiled map, adaptive schedules that choose
Tfrom training state or layer shape, and broader evaluation across model families,
hardware platforms, and distributed training layouts.
Acknowledgments.The authors acknowledge the Minnesota Supercomputing
Institute (MSI) at the University of Minnesota for providing the computational re-
sources on which the majority of the experiments in this paper were run. The authors
thank the developers of the Muon optimizer for making their implementation publicly
available.
REFERENCES
[1]K. Ahn, N. Amsel, and J. Langford,Dion2: A simple method to shrink matrix in Muon,
2025, https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.16928, https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.16928.
[2]T. Boissin, T. Massena, F. Mamalet, and M. Serrurier,Turbo-muon: Accelerating
orthogonality-based optimization with pre-conditioning, 2025, https://doi.org/10.48550/
arxiv.2512.04632, https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.04632, https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.04632.
[3]V. Boreiko, Z. Bu, and S. Zha,Towards understanding of orthogonalization in Muon,
in High-dimensional Learning Dynamics 2025, 2025, https://openreview.net/forum?id=
ppmyFtr9EW.
[4]D. Chang, Q. Shi, L. Zhang, Y. Li, R. Zhang, Y. Lu, Y. Liu, and G. Yuan,MuonEq:
Balancing before orthogonalization with lightweight equilibration, 2026, https://arxiv.org/
abs/2603.28254, https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.28254.
[5]P. Cheng, J. Zang, Q. Li, L. Ma, Y. Cui, Y. Zhang, B. Chen, M. Jian, and W. Tong,
TrasMuon: Trust-region adaptive scaling for orthogonalized momentum optimizers, 2026,
https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.13498, https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.13498.
[6]D. Davis and D. Drusvyatskiy,When do spectral gradient updates help in deep learn-
ing?, 2025, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2512.04299, https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.04299,
https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.04299.
[7]S. Deng, Z. Ouyang, T. Pang, Z. Liu, R. Jin, S. Yu, and Y. Yang,RMNP: Row-momentum
normalized preconditioning for scalable matrix-based optimization, 2026, https://arxiv.org/
abs/2603.20527, https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.20527.
[8]Z. Du and W. Su,The Newton-Muon optimizer, 2026, https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.01472.
[9]GLM-5 Team,GLM-5: from vibe coding to agentic engineering, 2026, https://arxiv.org/abs/
2602.15763, https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.15763.
[10]N. J. Higham,Computing the polar decomposition with applications, SIAM Journal on Scien-
tific and Statistical Computing, (1986), https://doi.org/10.1137/0907079.
[11]N. J. Higham,The matrix sign decomposition and its relation to the polar decomposition, 1994,
https://doi.org/10.1016/0024-3795(94)90393-x.
[12]N. J. Higham and T. Mary,A new approach to probabilistic rounding error analysis, SIAM
Journal on Scientific Computing, 41 (2019), pp. A2815–A2835, https://doi.org/10.1137/
22Z. TANG, T. XU, Y. SAAD, AND Y. XI
18M1226312.
[13]C. Hu, Q. Zhao, X. Yuan, H. Zhang, D. Yuan, Y. Wu, and X. Li,IFNSO: Iteration-free
Newton-Schulz orthogonalization, 2026, https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.02500, https://arxiv.
org/abs/2602.02500.
[14]T. Joo, W. Xia, C. Kim, M. Zhang, and E. Ie,On surprising effectiveness of masking
updates in adaptive optimizers, 2026, https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.15322, https://arxiv.org/
abs/2602.15322.
[15]K. Jordan, Y. Jin, V. Boza, J. You, F. Cesista, L. Newhouse, and J. Bernstein,Muon:
An optimizer for hidden layers in neural networks. https://kellerjordan.github.io/posts/
muon/, 2024.
[16]A. Khaled, K. Ozkara, T. Yu, M. Hong, and Y. Park,Muonbp: Faster muon via
block-periodic orthogonalization, 2025, https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2510.16981, https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2510.16981, https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16981.
[17]G. Y. Kim and M. hwan Oh,Convergence of Muon with Newton-Schulz, in The Fourteenth In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations, 2026, https://openreview.net/forum?
id=lJSfxtLpLm.
[18]J. Kim, E. Nichani, D. Wu, A. Bietti, and J. D. Lee,Sharp capacity scaling of spectral
optimizers in learning associative memory, 2026, https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.26554, https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2603.26554.
[19]T. T.-K. Lau, Q. Long, and W. Su,PolarGrad: A class of matrix-gradient optimizers from
a unifying preconditioning perspective, 2026, https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.21799, https://
arxiv.org/abs/2505.21799.
[20]Z. Li, L. Liu, C. Liang, W. Chen, and T. Zhao,NorMuon: Making Muon more ef-
ficient and scalable, 2025, https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2510.05491, https://arxiv.org/
abs/arxiv.2510.05491.
[21]J. Liu, J. Su, X. Yao, et al.,Muon is scalable for LLM training, 2025, https://doi.org/10.
48550/arxiv.2502.16982, https://arxiv.org/abs/arxiv.2502.16982.
[22]I. Masliah, A. Abdelfattah, A. Haidar, S. Tomov, M. Baboulin, J. Falcou, and J. Don-
garra,Algorithms and optimization techniques for high-performance matrix-matrix mul-
tiplications of very small matrices, Parallel Computing, (2019), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
parco.2018.10.003.
[23]I.-V. Modoranu, P. Zmushko, E. Schultheis, M. Safaryan, and D. Alistarh,DASH:
Faster shampoo via batched block preconditioning and efficient inverse-root solvers, 2026,
https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.02016, https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.02016.
[24]G. Penedo, H. Kydlicek, L. B. allal, A. Lozhkov, M. Mitchell, C. Raffel, L. V. Werra,
and T. Wolf,The fineweb datasets: Decanting the web for the finest text data at scale,
2024, https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2406.17557, https://arxiv.org/abs/arxiv.2406.17557.
[25]Qwen Team,Qwen3 technical report, 2025, https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09388, https://arxiv.
org/abs/2505.09388.
[26]A. Semenov, M. Pagliardini, and M. Jaggi,Benchmarking optimizers for large language
model pretraining, 2025, https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2509.01440, https://arxiv.org/
abs/arxiv.2509.01440.
[27]Z. Shumaylov, N. D. Costa, P. Zaika, B. Mucs ´anyi, A. Massucco, Y. Gelberg, C.-
B. Sch ¨onlieb, Y. Gal, and P. Hennig,Muon is not that special: Random or inverted
spectra work just as well, 2026, https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.11181, https://arxiv.org/abs/
2605.11181.
[28]B. S. Southworth and S. Thomas,Beyond Muon: MUD (MomentUm decorrelation) for
faster transformer training, 2026, https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.17970, https://arxiv.org/
abs/2603.17970.
[29]W. Su,Isotropic curvature model for understanding deep learning optimization: Is gradient or-
thogonalization optimal?, 2025, https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.00674, https://arxiv.org/abs/
2511.00674.
[30]P. Tillet, H.-T. Kung, and D. D. Cox,Triton: an intermediate language and compiler for
tiled neural network computations, Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGPLAN International
Workshop on Machine Learning and Programming Languages, (2019), https://doi.org/10.
1145/3315508.3329973.
[31]K. Wen, D. Hall, T. Ma, and P. Liang,Fantastic pretraining optimizers and where to find
them, 2025, https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2509.02046, https://arxiv.org/abs/arxiv.2509.
02046.
[32]C. Yang, Y. Wang, T. Kurth, S. Farrell, and S. Williams,Hierarchical roofline
performance analysis for deep learning applications, 2021, https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-80126-7 35.
HIMUON23
[33]S. Yang, Z. Wang, O. Balabanov, N. B. Erickson, and M. W. Mahoney,PRISM:
Distribution-free adaptive computation of matrix functions for accelerating neural network
training, 2026, https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.22137, https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.22137.
[34]H. Zhang, W. Zhou, W. Chen, and X. Cheng,When and why grouping attention heads ac-
celerates Muon optimization, 2026, https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.08933, https://arxiv.org/
abs/2605.08933.
[35]R. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Z. Liu, Z. Wang, D. Li, Y. Su, S. Liu, and Z. Zhang,TEON: Tensorized
orthonormalization beyond layer-wise Muon for large language model pre-training, 2026,
https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.23261, https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.23261.
[36]R. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Z. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Su, L. Tan, and Z. Zhang,Muon+: Towards more
effective muon via one additional normalization step for llm pre-training, 2026, https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2602.21545, https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.21545.
